[Unknown]: I.V.M.
[Amit Varma]: I.V.M.
[Amit Varma]: Indian Colors is a company that licenses images of the finest modern art from some of the
[Amit Varma]: best artists in India and adapts them into objects of everyday use.
[Amit Varma]: These include wearable art like stoles and shrugs, home decor like cushion covers and
[Amit Varma]: table runners and accessories like tote bags.
[Amit Varma]: This allows art lovers to actually get fine art into their homes at an accessible price
[Amit Varma]: and artists get royalties on sales just like authors do.
[Amit Varma]: What's more, Indian Colors now has an exciting range of new products including fridge magnets
[Amit Varma]: with some stunning motifs and salad bowls and platters made of mango wood.
[Amit Varma]: Their artists include luminaries like Babu Xavier, Vazvo X Vazvo, Brinda Miller, Dilip
[Amit Varma]: Sharma, Shruti Nelson and Pradeep Mishra.
[Amit Varma]: They accept bulk orders for corporate and festival gifting but even if you want to buy
[Amit Varma]: just for yourself or a friend, head on over to IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: That's colors with an OU.
[Amit Varma]: And if you want a 20% discount, apply the code IVM20.
[Amit Varma]: That's IVM for IVM Podcast.
[Amit Varma]: IVM20 for a 20% discount at IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Srinath, welcome to the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks so much.
[Amit Varma]: Srinath, you're the first historian on the scene in the unseen and your history is quite
[Amit Varma]: interesting itself because you had mentioned that you were into theoretical physics and
[Amit Varma]: were thinking of getting a PhD in theoretical physics, but then you joined the Rajputana
[Amit Varma]: Rifles and then you spent a few years there and then you got into becoming a historian.
[Amit Varma]: So how did how did that happen?
[Guest]: Well, as an undergraduate, I was studying physics and hoping to do doctoral work there.
[Guest]: But you know, with things like theoretical physics or pure mathematics, either you're
[Guest]: really good or you're no good.
[Guest]: You know, you can't be there's no such thing as a middling sort of physicist in some ways.
[Guest]: And I kind of understood pretty quickly that I was on the no good side of things.
[Guest]: So decided to drop the sciences but had very little idea what else to do.
[Guest]: And I had a couple of friends from college who had signed up for the short service commission
[Guest]: and that seemed to me to be an interesting way to spend a few years, you know, get to
[Guest]: see places I hadn't and then hopefully make up my mind about what I wanted to do.
[Guest]: So I joined the Indian Army and got commissioned to the Rajputana Rifles.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: And tell me something about how you got drawn to history per se, like, were you always a
[Amit Varma]: keen reader of sort of books of history and then decided that, hey, I want to do this
[Amit Varma]: myself or was there something which kind of triggered that?
[Guest]: Well, I mean, I was always very interested in politics from the time I was a student
[Guest]: growing up in India, in some ways, you couldn't help it.
[Guest]: Early 90s was a highly political time in this country.
[Guest]: And I was very interested in sort of politics.
[Guest]: I was fortunate that when I was a teenager, I was surrounded by people who gave me a lot
[Guest]: of exposure to learning, thinking about politics.
[Guest]: And of course, history was always a way into that.
[Guest]: But I must confess that I didn't get around to doing any serious sort of study of history
[Guest]: till such time actually I was halfway through my tenure in the army, when it became interesting
[Guest]: to me that, you know, some of the things that I was sort of actually doing had, you know,
[Guest]: military history and the history of war per se, particular caught my fancy.
[Guest]: And that is how I started getting interested in it.
[Guest]: You know, when I look back, I think the one history book which possibly had the most impact
[Guest]: on me was something that I never read as a piece of history in that sense is this book
[Guest]: called The Making of the Atomic Bomb by Richard Rhodes, which won a Pulitzer Prize in 1989,
[Guest]: if I'm not mistaken.
[Guest]: And an uncle of mine who used to go to the United States quite often back in those days,
[Guest]: actually got me a copy and I must have read it several times.
[Guest]: I still have it on my shelves.
[Amit Varma]: And I still think it's a great book.
[Amit Varma]: Well, so that's that's a book that listeners can get from Amazon right away.
[Amit Varma]: And being a historian, what does it involve?
[Amit Varma]: Like we live in an age, of course, where you don't only have facts, you also have alternative
[Amit Varma]: facts and you have all kinds of narratives being peddled.
[Amit Varma]: So at one level, there is, of course, the sense that the layman might have that, oh,
[Amit Varma]: we know what happened in history.
[Amit Varma]: Why do we need to, you know, kind of go back and look for, you know, what are we really
[Amit Varma]: looking for?
[Amit Varma]: And at the other level, there's almost a sense that now, though, it doesn't matter.
[Amit Varma]: Anybody can say anything, anything goes.
[Amit Varma]: So what does it really involve?
[Amit Varma]: Like, when you choose a particular project, do you start with a fascination over, say,
[Amit Varma]: a particular historical character?
[Amit Varma]: Or do you feel that there is a shortcoming with some specific narrative?
[Amit Varma]: Or do you feel that there are gaps in this narrative and I need to fill them?
[Guest]: How does it?
[Guest]: Yeah, I think it's more the latter rather than the former, at least in my case.
[Guest]: And the way that typically historians and people who are sort of studying history professionally
[Guest]: tend to sort of approach is to say that, listen, you want to take a look at some particular
[Guest]: question and then try and, you know, get a grip on it by looking at historical materials,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So, in a sense, what we tend to think of as being taken for granted are things which are
[Guest]: constantly up for revision.
[Guest]: So in that sense, you know, there's a great Dutch historian called Peter Gale, who said
[Guest]: that history is an argument without end.
[Guest]: And I think that's a very good way of thinking about the subject, which is to say that you're
[Guest]: constantly approaching the past with new perspectives, because the questions that you're interested
[Guest]: about the past are always determined by your present.
[Guest]: So it's your current politics, it's your current sort of social interests that in some ways,
[Guest]: trigger your interest in the past.
[Guest]: That is how the study of history continuously evolves over a period of time.
[Guest]: And when you're looking at new themes, you're also looking at new evidence.
[Guest]: So you're looking at new archives, you're looking at new texts.
[Guest]: So in that sense, you know, it is rarely the case that in history, people tend to disagree
[Guest]: about brute facts, right?
[Guest]: I mean, of course, you always have some debates about how valuable this or that piece of evidence
[Guest]: is.
[Guest]: But what you're looking for is a fit between argument and evidence.
[Guest]: And in that sense, it's, you know, history, like the other social sciences, is continually
[Guest]: determined by your sort of current location and your interests, social location, political
[Guest]: location matters a lot.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess it's necessarily true that every simple narrative is fundamentally wrong because
[Amit Varma]: of its simplicity.
[Amit Varma]: And there are layers and layers and you essentially kind of, so you know, before we get to the
[Amit Varma]: subject at hand for this episode, what does your work then really involve?
[Amit Varma]: Like when you when you begin a project, you already sort of have a broad narrative in
[Amit Varma]: mind and you're looking for evidence that confirms it?
[Amit Varma]: Or are you just saying that, hey, this is interesting, let me go a little deeper and
[Amit Varma]: find out.
[Amit Varma]: And then like, how does it work?
[Amit Varma]: What kind of like, when you talk about, you know, going into the archives, what are these
[Amit Varma]: archives?
[Amit Varma]: How do you find this material?
[Amit Varma]: How do you approach it?
[Guest]: So let me give you a sort of explain this using a concrete example.
[Guest]: So my one of the books I wrote, actually, my second book was a history of the creation
[Guest]: of Bangladesh in 1971.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So for a project like that, basically, I was actually working on a another earlier project
[Guest]: that led me to find a bunch of papers, which completely astonished me for the depth of
[Guest]: material that they had on the Bangladesh crisis.
[Guest]: And these were the papers of P.N. Huxer, the principal secretary to Mrs. Indira Gandhi,
[Guest]: who was a very key figure during the 1971 crisis.
[Guest]: So what I got really was a bunch of materials which suggested to me that, hey, there's so
[Guest]: much in here that is not known, that could be used to tell a much more better informed
[Guest]: and a better story.
[Guest]: But of course, you can't do it with just one set of materials, right?
[Guest]: So then for several years, I started researching it.
[Guest]: And the more I went into the subject, it seemed to me that, you know, just a lot of stuff
[Guest]: had been written primarily from either the Indian or the Bangladeshi or the Pakistani
[Guest]: perspective.
[Guest]: But what was very interesting to me was the global dimension of the crisis, how so many
[Guest]: other players who are in some ways geographically remote, were nevertheless politically very
[Guest]: involved and how all of that came through.
[Guest]: As I dug deeper into the subject, it became apparent to me that we're not only talking
[Guest]: about states who are involved, but also other kinds of people, the cultural influences,
[Guest]: you know, the concept of Bangladesh in 1971, you know, someone like Allen Ginsberg writing
[Guest]: the famous poem in the New York Times and so on, right?
[Guest]: So what it then led me to was to basically take a very different approach to thinking
[Guest]: about the creation of Bangladesh, which in turn then led me to start questioning some
[Guest]: fundamental assumptions, right?
[Guest]: That in some ways, the creation of Bangladesh was inevitable because these two geographical
[Guest]: parts were separate.
[Guest]: Actually, not true at all.
[Guest]: In fact, it was much more contingent.
[Guest]: And that was one of the main arguments of the book that if things had not taken the
[Guest]: turn that they did in the late 1960s, and for reasons which are not specific to Bangladesh,
[Guest]: but for a global conjuncture, you may never have had this crisis coming out, right?
[Guest]: Which is a bit of an unsettling proposition to make, particularly for Bangladeshis.
[Guest]: But that's the way I think history moves is that you start with some piece of evidence,
[Guest]: you see how it fits with what the received narratives are, then you come up with a different
[Guest]: way of explaining this stuff.
[Amit Varma]: And then you sort of present an alternative sort of narrative.
[Amit Varma]: Sadanand That's fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, one day we should do an episode on 1971.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, the whole Bangladesh thing sort of forms part of the narrative of this book.
[Amit Varma]: Your latest book is called The Most Dangerous Place, Colonial History of the United States
[Amit Varma]: in South Asia.
[Amit Varma]: And what the book looks at is essentially evolving American attitudes towards this region,
[Amit Varma]: which we call South Asia over the last more than 200 years.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, how did you arrive at this kind of specific project?
[Amit Varma]: And I'm also intrigued by the title, The Most Dangerous Place in the World.
[Guest]: Dr. Sanjay Gupta Yeah, so the project in some ways is, you
[Guest]: know, for various other projects that I've been doing, especially for the three previous
[Guest]: books that I wrote, including this book on the creation of Bangladesh, I had been visiting
[Guest]: various American archives, the National Archives of the United States, various presidential
[Guest]: libraries to do research over the last 15 years or so.
[Guest]: So at some point, you know, about three or four years ago, it struck me that I just have
[Guest]: so much materials that I could still use to sort of tell a story of American involvement
[Guest]: in this region.
[Guest]: And it's again, it struck me that much of the narrative and much of the good scholarship
[Guest]: and the good books that we have are primarily focusing either on very specific periods like
[Guest]: the Cold War, they tend to focus on the high politics, which is to say, you know, US India,
[Guest]: US Pakistan relationships, or they tend to focus on one sets of relationship, right?
[Guest]: I mean, it's about how the United States dealt with India, and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: And it seemed to me that what we needed was a book which was at once broader, and longer
[Guest]: in historical chronological scope.
[Guest]: And you know, I had already written a book on India during the Second World War in which
[Guest]: the United States did play an important role in my research and writing.
[Guest]: And it just struck me that, you know, that I actually needed to go back right to the
[Guest]: moment of the founding of the American Republic, and think about US involvement with this part
[Guest]: of the world in a longer term story.
[Guest]: Because I think one of the great stories of the 20th century, from a historical standpoint,
[Guest]: is the rise of the United States as a global power without peer and without historical
[Guest]: sort of, you know, comparison being there.
[Guest]: So in a sense, to me, the really interesting thing about this book was an attempt to say,
[Guest]: how does South Asia fit into the story of American ascendancy?
[Guest]: You know, where does this region come in, which in some ways seems so peripheral, that's
[Guest]: what everyone assumes, but which has from time to time, you know, imposed itself on
[Guest]: core concerns.
[Guest]: I mean, to give you just one example, and we can pick up on other things as we go, you
[Guest]: know, think of the most dangerous moment in the second half of the 20th century, the Cuban
[Guest]: Missile Crisis, right?
[Guest]: But the Cuban Missile Crisis is a time when the United States is so focused on its main
[Guest]: rivalry with the Soviet Union, right?
[Guest]: There's nuclear weapons, all of that stuff, right?
[Guest]: It's everything that you would assume with the main concerns of the Cold War.
[Guest]: But at the same time, the Americans are confronted with the problem that the Chinese have attacked
[Guest]: India, right?
[Guest]: So the Sino-Indian crisis is something that the Kennedy administration has to attend to
[Guest]: even while the Cuban Missile Crisis is playing out, right?
[Guest]: So in a sense, the periphery has a way of imposing itself on the core, which I think
[Guest]: is the reason why history constantly surprises statesmen, right?
[Guest]: Which is why somebody said, you know, a week is a long time in politics.
[Guest]: I think that's the reason because you never know what's coming up next.
[Amit Varma]: And your book is organized along broadly chronological lines.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, there are these three strands running through it of, you know, American
[Amit Varma]: interest in South Asia, these three sort of different areas of concern for them.
[Amit Varma]: So can you talk a little bit about how you made that the organizing principle in a sense?
[Guest]: Yeah, sure.
[Guest]: So, so the three strands that I sort of talk about really are power, ideology and culture.
[Guest]: And I say that if you want to understand the sort of taken, have an interpretive grasp
[Guest]: of how the United States has interacted with this part of the world and how that interaction
[Guest]: has changed, has become important, less important, you know, immediate problems come in there
[Guest]: are longer term.
[Guest]: But from a sort of a 230 year perspective, there are these three strands which really
[Guest]: stand out in American involvement with this part of the world.
[Guest]: The first is power, by which I mean the pursuit of interest in the first instance of economic
[Guest]: interest because that's what Americans came to the subcontinent for trade.
[Guest]: But then subsequently, of course, you had geopolitical and security military interests,
[Guest]: particularly in the second half of the 20th century, which becomes a very important theme.
[Guest]: The second is the role of ideology.
[Guest]: And there again, you know, there is a peculiar sort of American ideological constellation,
[Guest]: which has been very important in the way that the United States has sort of dealt with the
[Guest]: rest of the world.
[Guest]: And this is something which is reasonably well established by historians of the United
[Guest]: States is a combination of what you might call as Protestant and Republican ideas, right?
[Guest]: So the United States has this sense of itself at the moment of its creation in 1776, as
[Guest]: this divinely sort of elect country, which has a mission and that mission is the spread
[Guest]: of liberty to the rest of the world, right?
[Guest]: So it's a very powerful fusion of these two themes of Protestantism and Republicanism,
[Guest]: which is a very peculiar feature of American sort of ideology, which again, is has been
[Guest]: a running theme from the sort of moment of creation and their engagement with the subcontinent
[Guest]: through almost to the present.
[Guest]: I mean, you only need to think about someone like Barack Obama saying that, you know, United
[Guest]: States is the indispensable nation, right?
[Guest]: I mean, so there's a sense not just of exceptionalism in the ordinary sort of sense of it, but there
[Guest]: is a peculiar quality to that exceptionalism.
[Guest]: And I wanted to emphasize how those ideas have been very important in the way that the
[Guest]: United States has dealt with this part of the world.
[Guest]: And the third is really about culture, by which I actually mean two slightly different,
[Guest]: but nevertheless related things.
[Guest]: The first and in some ways, the easiest way is about transmission of cultural ideas, right?
[Guest]: So you want to talk about things like how popular American culture, Hollywood, or in
[Guest]: my case, jazz, more interestingly, has always been an important part of the way that American
[Guest]: mores and values were tried to be transmitted to this part of the world.
[Guest]: And of course, how people appropriate those and make very different things of them, right?
[Guest]: So what does it mean to listen to, you know, Duke Ellington in Afghanistan in the early
[Guest]: 1960s is an interesting question.
[Guest]: I have a sort of a broader emphasis on culture, which is of saying that how do you understand
[Guest]: people's societies, which are very different from you?
[Guest]: How do you cope with this idea of difference?
[Guest]: And there I say that, you know, American ideas of race, religion, in particular, among other
[Guest]: things have been very important in the way that the United States has understood this
[Guest]: about, right?
[Guest]: So I use sort of accounts of missionaries, of travelers, of merchants, of people who
[Guest]: are sort of engaging with this part of the world politically, journalists, and so on.
[Guest]: And what do you find is that while the sort of the tenor of the engagement changes, there
[Guest]: is some underlying consistency to it, which I try to capture by the idea of hierarchy,
[Guest]: which is to say the Americans have always thought of the subcontinent as, you know,
[Guest]: being hierarchically somewhat lower placed than them, right?
[Guest]: So the Anglo-Saxons are pretty much at the top and so on.
[Guest]: And, you know, these ideas tend to evolve over a period of time.
[Guest]: Initially, it was about race, then it was about some sort of biological construct, then
[Guest]: it's about survival of the strongest and so on.
[Guest]: But right down to the 20th century, there was the sense that, you know, these are very
[Guest]: different people.
[Guest]: And to give you an example, I mean, even things that we wouldn't consider as sort of inflected
[Guest]: with these things, like ideas about economic development in the 20th century, American
[Guest]: modernization theories, which was so influential in the way that the United States assisted
[Guest]: various countries with the economic development, were very much premised on this idea that
[Guest]: there are some countries which are underdeveloped at the bottom of the civilizational scale,
[Guest]: and others are at the top.
[Guest]: And the challenge is to get those at the bottom to emulate those at the top.
[Guest]: So in that sense, I say that, you know, this notion of hierarchy has been remarkably sort
[Guest]: of durable, and is a very important part of understanding how the Americans understood.
[Guest]: Because in some ways, when we think about things like interests, or power, you know,
[Guest]: we almost think of them as tangible things, right?
[Guest]: I mean, that's why everyone says, you know, you've got to be realistic, because you think
[Guest]: that politics is about power and so on.
[Guest]: But power is something that is ultimately about how you perceive it, right?
[Guest]: So how your interests get constituted in the first place, I think, is a very important
[Guest]: part of understanding any political process.
[Guest]: And there, this cultural dimension of it seems to me to be very, very important.
[Guest]: I mean, the way that the Americans from very early on made a distinction between Islam
[Guest]: and Hinduism in the subcontinent, you know, those had sort of implications for the way
[Guest]: they saw India and Pakistan after 1947.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: And you sort of start off the book talking about the late 18th century traders who first
[Amit Varma]: came here, and immediately you see a confluence of both the economic interests, because they've
[Amit Varma]: obviously come to make money and also this cultural aspect that you speak of where that
[Amit Varma]: sense of racial and cultural superiority is immediately evident.
[Amit Varma]: And it almost seems to arise to begin with from a visceral reaction to sort of what they
[Amit Varma]: saw around them.
[Amit Varma]: Like there's one writer you've quoted in your book who talks about being so disgusted by
[Amit Varma]: a quote unquote, loathsome beggar, that he can't even get himself to hit him because
[Amit Varma]: he can't even you know, and and that sense of, you know, so they have this condescending
[Amit Varma]: and very superior attitude towards Indians aligned with this, you know, or rather sort
[Amit Varma]: of contrasted with their economic interest in, you know, embedding themselves and kind
[Guest]: of making money.
[Guest]: That is right.
[Guest]: Because, you know, the one thing we have to realize is that in the early decades after
[Guest]: American independence in 1776, see, the United States was in pretty much in doldrums economically,
[Guest]: right.
[Guest]: And there was a huge outward drive towards finding new markets, new avenues for trade
[Guest]: and so on.
[Guest]: And there was a very influential group of, you know, merchant seafaring merchants based
[Guest]: primarily in the Boston area, New England, who became the vanguard of much of this trade.
[Guest]: China was always a very important destination.
[Guest]: But in the course of that, India also becomes quite important.
[Guest]: And tracing those links is one of the sort of major challenges of seeing how the early
[Guest]: interactions happened.
[Guest]: But as you're saying, even economic sort of interactions are influenced, inflected through
[Guest]: this cultural prism through which the Americans are trying to perceive.
[Guest]: And I don't want to give a sense that, you know, this is some kind of simple monolithic
[Guest]: idea of sort of superiority out there.
[Guest]: I think the fundamental issue is not so much about superiority, inferiority as about some
[Guest]: sense of hierarchy, which is to say that even if people are at the bottom, you feel that,
[Guest]: you know, they need to be helped, right?
[Guest]: I mean, so even a benevolent impulse can come from a sense of hierarchy.
[Guest]: And at bottom, this is about how you deal with difference.
[Guest]: How do you deal with people who are so different from you are, right?
[Guest]: How do you deal with a religion like Hinduism or whatever, a group of people who call themselves
[Guest]: the Hindus, who have this unique institution called the caste system, you know, which you've
[Guest]: never sort of come across.
[Guest]: I mean, you have race in America, which is very understandable to you.
[Guest]: But then you use the prism of the race to understand how this sort of caste arrangement
[Guest]: works here, right?
[Guest]: And then you come up with certain kinds of...
[Guest]: So those ideas, the sort of often contradictory impulses and constellation of things crystallize
[Guest]: over a period of time.
[Guest]: And what I then try and show is how they remain durable and important well into the 20th century.
[Amit Varma]: And what you really have in the first half of the 19th century, as you describe it, is
[Amit Varma]: that American interaction with South Asia, with India and so on is basically takes two
[Amit Varma]: manifestations.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, one is trade, one is missionaries.
[Amit Varma]: So the missionaries, of course, embodying what you call the benevolent impulse that
[Amit Varma]: these are low people and we must lift them up.
[Amit Varma]: And trade, of course, being what it is.
[Amit Varma]: And gradually during this time, you talk about how India for them evolves from being a quote
[Amit Varma]: unquote land of fortune to a realm of fantasy.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, where they get more interested in sort of the spiritual aspect of India,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the transcendentalists sort of also get pretty influenced by that.
[Amit Varma]: But in the middle of the 19th century, you point to two things, two events, which change
[Amit Varma]: that interaction between America and South Asia completely.
[Guest]: That's right.
[Guest]: So the two events that you're referring to are the sort of Indian sort of rebellion of
[Guest]: 1857-58 and the American Civil War, which starts just a few years afterwards.
[Guest]: And both of these are sort of important historical ruptures in these societies in their own right.
[Guest]: But what it means is that the early period of interaction, when you have this very dense
[Guest]: commercial exchanges, all of that comes to a close, right?
[Guest]: Now, in some ways, India does benefit from the American Civil War.
[Guest]: For instance, Indian cotton exports had a huge boom because American sort of cotton
[Guest]: was sort of locked up, right, because of the Civil War and so on.
[Guest]: So you did have some or even things like, you know, the export of sort of Pashmina from
[Guest]: Kashmir.
[Guest]: Kashmir actually experienced a major boom during the American Civil War.
[Guest]: So you did have some benefits.
[Guest]: But the reality was that the, you know, the sort of the long distance trade, which was
[Guest]: a mainstay in some ways, comes to an end because of this period.
[Guest]: And after that, when there is a reconfiguration, it happens in more or less autonomous ways,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So after the Indian sort of rebellion is quelled and India is integrated in the British Empire,
[Guest]: you have the integration of India with the global economy under the aegis of the British
[Guest]: Empire, right?
[Guest]: So that's a very different form of engagement with the rest of the world.
[Guest]: And the United States, of course, becomes this continent sized economy at home, which
[Guest]: Americans realize that, you know, if only we know how to exploit this market, then we
[Guest]: are set because, you know, and for the rest of the 19th century and well into the 20th
[Guest]: century, the rest of the world actually matters very little in terms of trade for the United
[Guest]: States.
[Guest]: I mean, even today, actually, if you just look at traders percentage of American GDP,
[Guest]: you will find that it's much lesser than that of any other advanced economy, because the
[Guest]: United States has this humongous advantage of a continent sized economy, which the Americans
[Guest]: were learning to sort of integrate, exploit, build companies on scale, etc, etc.
[Guest]: All of that happens in the 19th century.
[Guest]: So that the two sort of revolutions are in some ways, a major point of rupture.
[Guest]: But nevertheless, there are some continuities across this period, particularly in the realm
[Guest]: of some of those things you mentioned, like the activities of missionaries, right?
[Guest]: And again, I think the whole question of missionaries and religion shows the kind of contradictory
[Guest]: strands that you had to this interaction.
[Guest]: Once again, it's not monolithic at all.
[Guest]: So on the one hand, you had these missionaries who first came to the subcontinent in 1812.
[Guest]: Now before that period, the British East India Company would not allow any missionary activity
[Guest]: to happen in India, including British missionaries were not allowed.
[Guest]: So when it opens up, that's the time when the Americans are also constituting the missionary
[Guest]: board.
[Guest]: So it's a good, nice confluence of things.
[Guest]: So American missionaries start coming to this part of the world, you know, as early as 1813,
[Guest]: they are in Burma in places of what you'd call like Nagaland today already.
[Guest]: But then they spread out to other parts of the world.
[Guest]: And you know, initially, they have very little success in their actual mission, which is
[Guest]: that of harvesting souls and converting people to Christianity.
[Guest]: But there are other kinds of social sort of consequences which follow from missionary
[Guest]: activity are I think very important, and are running through the 19th century into the
[Guest]: early 20th century.
[Guest]: You know, the missionaries are the first ones who introduced print culture in various parts
[Guest]: of India, including Western India, you know, we're doing this in Bombay.
[Guest]: And, you know, this part of the world benefited a lot from various kinds of printing presses
[Guest]: established by the missionaries.
[Guest]: The missionaries were the first ones actually to have, you know, dictionaries for Indian
[Guest]: languages in English, because they had to sort of translate the Bible, because you know,
[Guest]: Protestantism expects that you would engage with the text yourself, right?
[Guest]: They were the first ones who emphasized primary education, even for women and girls.
[Guest]: Jyoti Bapule and his wife were both, you know, educated in missionary schools.
[Guest]: You know, the missionaries in Southern India, like my home state of Tamil Nadu, were very
[Guest]: active in what were then known as the paraya colonies or where Dalits lived and, you know,
[Guest]: very influential in giving them education, allowing them, sensitizing them to land rights
[Guest]: and such like things.
[Guest]: You know, later in the 19th century, missionaries were active in famine relief in Victorian
[Guest]: India.
[Guest]: And of course, you know, they were active in a range of sort of quasi developmental medical
[Guest]: activities as well.
[Guest]: You know, you think of something like Christian Missionary College in Vellore, which is the
[Guest]: first big medical college in this country set up by American missionaries.
[Guest]: You know, the eradication of hookworm was actually undertaken by American missionaries
[Guest]: supported by the Rockefeller Foundation already by 1910-15.
[Guest]: So you have this extraordinary seam of activity, which is continuing despite this rupture.
[Amit Varma]: And would you say this is something that is part of or runs parallel to America's otherwise
[Amit Varma]: sense of manifest destiny, you know, which, you know, you've defined as, you know, the
[Amit Varma]: spread of liberty and republicanism and all that.
[Amit Varma]: But it seems that at another level, there is, and this perhaps arises to begin with
[Amit Varma]: out of the benevolent instinct, but is also, you know, a sort of a reform process at the
[Amit Varma]: same time where they see all these things that are wrong with the local culture in their
[Amit Varma]: eyes, of course, not necessarily otherwise.
[Amit Varma]: And then they try to reform it and a lot of good comes out of that.
[Guest]: No, I think it's very much part of this process, right.
[Guest]: So the idea of manifest destiny is first, you know, adumbrated in the American context
[Guest]: in the 1830s.
[Guest]: And the idea is to say that, you know, basically United States has is destined to conquer all
[Guest]: of North America, right, because there were all these territories which were occupied
[Guest]: by indigenous communities, the Indians in North America, and manifest destiny was basically
[Guest]: an ideological sort of justification for American expansion in a continental sense, right.
[Guest]: But what is interesting, and to me, it was very striking was how this whole ideology
[Guest]: of manifest destiny in some ways was always justified as being completely in contrast
[Guest]: to the imperialism being practiced by other countries like Britain, particularly in cases
[Guest]: like India, right.
[Guest]: So, American imperialism at home, or American expansionism at home, was always seen as a
[Guest]: better alternative to the kind of exploitation of countries like India that were being done
[Guest]: by the British, right.
[Amit Varma]: In the sense of less coercive.
[Guest]: Yeah, not just less coercive, but they believe that, you know, Americans are settlers, they
[Guest]: actually settle down in this land, whereas British are just coming, they're visiting,
[Guest]: they're going back, they're exploiting this country, they're taking away its treasures.
[Guest]: So it's very interesting how the American reading of India up to the mid 19th century
[Guest]: is really, you know, is a mirror through which they look at Britain itself, right, which
[Guest]: is a country with which they have very serious problems at this point of time.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, in one of your early chapters, you've also cited this defense of slavery that was
[Amit Varma]: made by someone who said that, hey, you talk about slavery, but look at the British oppression
[Guest]: of the Indian natives that is far, far worse.
[Guest]: Exactly, right.
[Guest]: And in a sense, once Britain becomes this great advocate of abolition of slavery, you
[Guest]: know, that the whole abolitionist movement is in Britain, the Americans, especially in
[Guest]: the South, who are the pro slavery lot, are, you know, constantly calling out British hypocrisy
[Guest]: by pointing to India, right.
[Guest]: So in a sense, India is part of those domestic American debates.
[Guest]: So it's in that sense that I feel that, you know, while in a sense, many people may not
[Guest]: have actually known India, India did have an important part in this American ideology.
[Guest]: And of course, Protestantism and the role of the missions was very much part of this
[Guest]: idea that, you know, the United States has discovered this unique constellation of providential
[Guest]: sort of, you know, faith based sort of blessings with this ability to sort of craft a republican
[Guest]: model of politics and that this is in some ways the best thing for the rest of the world,
[Guest]: right.
[Guest]: And of course, there were differences even the United States about how to take that in
[Guest]: some ways mirrors this whole democracy promotion kind of debates of the last decade, you know,
[Guest]: which is to say that should the United States sort of, you know, stand as a shining city
[Guest]: on the hill and act as a model or should it actually be sort of doing things actively
[Guest]: and so on.
[Guest]: And then there were always debates about those kinds of things.
[Guest]: But I think there was a broad consensus that yes, the United States was in some ways destined
[Guest]: and they were people who were chosen, elect, which is a Protestant sort of way of thinking.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess if there was an ebb and flow on this, you could say the period between the
[Amit Varma]: two world wars was sort of the ebb when it, you know, drifted more towards isolationism
[Amit Varma]: and saying, hey, we'll have nothing to do with the world.
[Amit Varma]: And that's also a very interesting period in world history, because for the first time,
[Amit Varma]: you don't really have one dominant power anymore.
[Amit Varma]: You know, Britain has kind of lost some of that and there's sort of a vacuum within which
[Amit Varma]: the Great Depression happens and Nazi Germany happens and all those kind of things happen.
[Amit Varma]: So but in that period, what I also found interesting in your book is that you see, you know, you've
[Amit Varma]: pointed out the various contradictory stands of one, there is this growing cultural fascination
[Amit Varma]: with India, especially someone like Gandhi, who was described by them as the greatest
[Amit Varma]: living person and Time magazine made him person of the year in 1930.
[Amit Varma]: And there's something symbiotic there also, because a lot of Gandhi's inspiration came
[Amit Varma]: from Thoreau and a lot of Thoreau's inspirations came from Indian mysticism.
[Amit Varma]: So it's kind of funny that way.
[Amit Varma]: But that again, is in contrast to this anti immigration sentiment that is coming up and
[Amit Varma]: the trouble that Indian immigrants in America are facing.
[Amit Varma]: But broadly, by the time the World War Two happens, you pointed to a couple of public
[Amit Varma]: polls, where there is widespread support for Indian independence in America, even though
[Amit Varma]: America, the state itself has taken a step back and saying, hey, you know, we're not
[Amit Varma]: going to interfere with the rest of the world.
[Guest]: That's right.
[Guest]: I think the period between the two world wars is kind of interesting, because while the
[Guest]: United States is not directly politically engaged, there is a much growing, greater
[Guest]: awareness of Indian politics, Indian society and so on.
[Guest]: And you know, this whole fascination with Gandhi in some ways is a reaction to the First
[Guest]: World War, right?
[Guest]: Because after the end of the war, you know, there's a huge pacifist movement, which happens
[Guest]: in most Western countries, to which there is a strand, even in the United States, and
[Guest]: some of the, you know, better known figures of that period, you know, actually came out
[Guest]: of that strand of pacifist thinking.
[Guest]: And for them, you know, Gandhi was this sort of scene as embodying this new form of politics,
[Guest]: which emphasizes nonviolence and civil disobedience.
[Guest]: And as you say, you know, in some ways, that goes back to Thoreau, whom Gandhi had read.
[Guest]: Now, you know, in an earlier question, you'd asked about, you know, this sort of transcendentalists
[Guest]: who are a group of, again, intellectuals, mostly in and around Boston, who are very
[Guest]: fascinated by India in the mid 19th century, Emerson, Thoreau, and others.
[Guest]: The interesting thing is how this phenomenon is a constant recurrence, right?
[Guest]: So, you have the transcendentalists in the mid 19th century, you have the American pacifists
[Guest]: in the early 20th century.
[Guest]: And if you fast forward into the 1960s, you have the American sort of hippie trail, so
[Guest]: to speak, right?
[Guest]: Now, in each of these instances, what you find is that India and its culture, particularly
[Guest]: the Indian sort of religion, especially the high philosophical sort of, you know, the
[Guest]: Upanishads and the mysticism, the sort of the metaphysics, so to speak, is seen as providing
[Guest]: an antidote to American commercialism, to American militarism, you know, in a sense,
[Guest]: India is this other to the United States, right?
[Guest]: So there's this constant fascination.
[Guest]: So with India as somehow providing a refute from everything that is wrong with the United
[Guest]: States, right?
[Guest]: So in a sense, the Gandhian moment is very much like that.
[Guest]: But what you find is that in the 1920s and 30s, there are lots of Americans who come,
[Guest]: who spend a lot of time with Gandhi.
[Guest]: In fact, some of the first expositions in sort of outside of India of Gandhian nonviolence
[Guest]: and its principles were undertaken by people.
[Guest]: Now these people, of course, went back and influenced another generation of American
[Guest]: activists during the civil rights movement, who again looked to Gandhi, you know, Martin
[Guest]: Luther King and others, for whom this was very important.
[Guest]: And of course, you know, and then vice versa, as you're saying that the transmission belt
[Guest]: of this kind of interaction between particularly groups of African Americans and the Indian
[Guest]: nationalist movement was very strong, right?
[Guest]: So you have a figure like Kamala Devi Chattopadhyay, who goes to the United States and, you know,
[Guest]: and then this sort of is really very well received in terms of the kinds of audiences
[Guest]: that she has and understands and tries to relate these two problems, right?
[Guest]: So there is a sense that just as African Americans are being oppressed within the United States
[Guest]: of America, the, you know, there is a problem of imperialism, which is seen as a sort of
[Guest]: international counterpart to a domestic problem, right?
[Guest]: So there are these many ways in which India and the United States at a sort of a common
[Guest]: popular level of that of the people come together before this great sort of geopolitical, you
[Guest]: know, watershed of the Second World War happens.
[Amit Varma]: And then with the Second World War, obviously, the US has to shed its isolationism.
[Amit Varma]: And you also have, you know, you also write about how Roosevelt is favorably inclined
[Amit Varma]: towards Indian independence, he pushes the cause, he tries to intervene, for example,
[Amit Varma]: when there is a famine in Bengal, and at various times, he tries to intervene with Churchill
[Amit Varma]: to sort of take a kinder attitude.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, there is a fact that India is, you know, also part of the war and
[Amit Varma]: Japan can invade at any time.
[Amit Varma]: So giving them independence now makes no sense.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, so Roosevelt also has to kind of contend with those sort of how did all
[Guest]: of that play out?
[Guest]: So, you know, by the time the Second World War begins, September 1939, the story in India
[Guest]: is that, you know, India has basically taken into the war, without any consultation with
[Guest]: any Indian, you know, sort of political groups.
[Guest]: It's worth recalling that at this point of time, it was Indian political parties, which
[Guest]: were in power in the provinces, Congress Party, of course, but others as well.
[Guest]: And that, you know, the Congress actually decides not to support the war effort, even
[Guest]: though they are favorably sort of, they do believe that the fascists have to be sort
[Guest]: of Nazis have to be resisted.
[Guest]: But they believe that Britain cannot on the one hand say that it's fighting for democracy
[Guest]: while withholding rights of Indians.
[Guest]: So there is this period of impasse, really between 1939 and 1942, when the Congress Party
[Guest]: is kind of trying to toy with various kinds of positions, which will allow it to reconcile
[Guest]: both these imperatives, one of supporting the war effort, which at least people like
[Guest]: Varlalai Roo and most of the other leadership was very favorably inclined.
[Guest]: Gandhi, of course, had a very different view because of his sort of stance on nonviolence.
[Guest]: But at the same time, you know, you also want some kind of statement from the British about
[Guest]: independence for India, which is not forthcoming at all.
[Guest]: And the United States has been sort of watching this and once the attack on Pearl Harbor,
[Guest]: which coincides with attacks on various British territories of Southeast Asia, and the advance
[Guest]: of Japanese to Burma by March, April 1942 happens and the United States is fully engaged,
[Guest]: then they decide that, you know, India has to be sort of bought into the war effort wholeheartedly
[Guest]: rather than this kind of a situation where their cooperation at the popular level seems
[Guest]: to be withheld, even though the Indian army is growing pretty fast.
[Guest]: But so it's in that context of the Roosevelt administration, actually, President Roosevelt
[Guest]: himself leans on Churchill to say that, you know, you have to sort of give some attention
[Guest]: to the India problem.
[Guest]: And it is against that backdrop that the famous sort of mission led by Stafford Cripps comes
[Guest]: to India to discuss with Indian leaders of various kinds about what kind of a constitutional
[Guest]: settlement can come up for India and with what timetable and so on.
[Guest]: Now the mission fails.
[Guest]: But what is interesting is how interested the Americans are in keeping that going.
[Guest]: Now even after that failure, the Americans don't disengage immediately.
[Guest]: It's actually the turning point really comes with the Quit India movement, which was a
[Guest]: popular movement, even though we tend to associate it with Gandhi and others, you know, what
[Guest]: a Karo Yamaro kind of slogan and so on, you know, do or die.
[Guest]: But the reality was that a lot of people started doing things quite autonomously during the
[Guest]: Quit India movement, right?
[Guest]: So there were many groups of protesters who went, the Quit India movement was quite violent.
[Guest]: You know, at least in eastern India and Bengal and other parts, there were military supply
[Guest]: lines which were being sort of endangered by the activities of the rebels.
[Guest]: And it is in that context that the Americans actually decide that we have to prioritize
[Guest]: the war with Japan over a domestic Indian political settlement.
[Guest]: And we cannot jeopardize this at this point of time by choosing sides between.
[Guest]: And of course, Churchill is an important ally because they do want Britain to remain engaged
[Guest]: in the war.
[Guest]: So in that context, Americans sort of take a back step and then don't really try and
[Guest]: play much of a role.
[Guest]: Though it's quite interesting that, you know, even successive sort of emissaries sent by
[Guest]: Roosevelt, however, tend to take a very sympathetic line towards, you know, Indian nationalism,
[Guest]: towards the Congress Party, towards Gandhi, who was in a major fast in early 1943.
[Amit Varma]: At one point, it looks like he might just die.
[Amit Varma]: And the Americans are intervening saying save his life.
[Guest]: Yeah, right.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: So, so in a sense, there is a degree of this thing.
[Guest]: But India becomes very important from the perspective of the war, because by 1943, India
[Guest]: emerges as this most important allied base for operations in Southeast Asia.
[Guest]: The Americans are involved in the subcontinent directly, in a sense of supporting economic
[Guest]: sort of activity around the war, the war effort itself, you know, it's striking.
[Guest]: There's one part of the rail network between Calcutta and Assam, which was then, you know,
[Guest]: Assam then included everything up to the Burma border, an 800 kilometer stretch of it, which
[Guest]: was actually operated by the Americans themselves directly, right.
[Guest]: So the Americans actually very heavily engaged, you know, they took over the sort of operations
[Guest]: of the Calcutta port to a considerable extent, right.
[Guest]: So they were very, very deeply involved in the subcontinent.
[Guest]: For the first time, you know, thousands of Americans actually saw the subcontinent soldiers
[Guest]: came here, lived here.
[Guest]: So in that sense, I think the Second World War really marks an important sort of rupture
[Amit Varma]: with everything.
[Amit Varma]: And do you think that sympathetic position that the Americans took and the interventions
[Amit Varma]: they made to Churchill had any role to play in making India's independence more probable?
[Guest]: Well, I mean, I think the fact was that the Cripps mission failed, as I said, in a sense
[Guest]: that you wouldn't have any immediate resolution.
[Guest]: But the mere fact that the British had to send out a mission and agree that India's
[Guest]: independence was on the cards meant that whenever the war came to an end, you are not going
[Guest]: to have a situation where the British could reasonably expect to dial back from that.
[Guest]: I think given the scale of India's commitment during the Second World War, given the scale
[Guest]: of sacrifices made by India during that period, I mean, just in terms of simple financial
[Guest]: transactions, you know, at the end of the Second World War, Britain owed India 3 billion
[Guest]: pounds, now, which in today's currency is like the equivalent of 300 billion US dollars.
[Guest]: You know, that was the amount of money that Britain owed to India for the war effort of
[Guest]: India, right?
[Guest]: So it's an extraordinary sort of mobilization of a very poor country.
[Amit Varma]: Which India of course wanted to use to rebuild its economy and so on and that didn't work
[Amit Varma]: out.
[Guest]: Yeah, that didn't work out.
[Guest]: So in a sense, you know, you had this extraordinary sort of, you know, transformation of the relationship
[Guest]: between Britain and India, which had happened during the course of the war.
[Guest]: So it was going to be very difficult for anyone to dial back from there.
[Guest]: But nevertheless, by the time the war comes to an end, the Americans are actually quite
[Guest]: happy to let the British sort of run the subcontinental affairs because they are just too engaged
[Guest]: on what is happening in Europe, you know, whether the sort of, you know, the post war
[Guest]: period and you know, the onset of the Cold War, etc.
[Guest]: As well as East Asia, with the occupations of Japan, Korea, you know, various kinds of
[Guest]: things happening.
[Guest]: The Americans are actually quite happy to let the British sort of come back into free
[Guest]: air.
[Guest]: And it's not really until the Korean War of 1950-53 that the Americans then decide to
[Guest]: displace the British and take a much more direct active role in the affairs of the subcontinent.
[Amit Varma]: I think World War Two is an apt time to take a quick commercial break.
[Unknown]: Hello, hello, hello, everybody.
[Unknown]: Welcome to another week on IBM podcast.
[Unknown]: It's been a great week.
[Unknown]: If you're not following us on social media, please make sure you do.
[Unknown]: Also, please make sure that you do tell a friend about a podcast.
[Unknown]: We really, really, really are trying to grow the audience and the more people who you tell,
[Unknown]: the better off we all are.
[Unknown]: On Cyrus Says this week, Cyrus talks to popular TV and theatre actor, Ritasha Rathore.
[Unknown]: Ritasha talks about Sex Rated, a recent Vice documentary that she hosted.
[Unknown]: On the Pragati podcast, Pawan and Hamsini are joined by author and journalist James
[Unknown]: Crabtree.
[Unknown]: They discuss his experience of being a foreign correspondent in India and how to understand
[Unknown]: cronyism in Indian policymaking.
[Unknown]: On the Scene and the Unseen, Amit Verma is joined by Srinath Raghavan, a former infantry
[Unknown]: officer in the Indian Army.
[Unknown]: He's a senior fellow at the Center for Policy Research and they discuss the history of US
[Unknown]: involvement in the South Asian region.
[Unknown]: On the Rediscovery Project, Ambika and Hoshna rediscover Mumbai this time.
[Unknown]: They talk about their visits to Elephanta Caves, Dharavi and Bhavdajilal Museum.
[Unknown]: On the Geekfruit podcast, leading up to the release of the second installment of the Fantastic
[Unknown]: Beasts franchise, Zinkaran and Jishnu revisit their origin stories of the Potter Wars.
[Unknown]: And with that, let's continue on with your show.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the Scene and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm here with Srinath Raghavan and we're talking about US attitude towards South Asia.
[Amit Varma]: Srinath, you were saying that, you know, we were talking about how the US was focused
[Amit Varma]: on, you know, became refocused on South Asia during World War Two after this long period
[Amit Varma]: of isolationism because India was both an important front in the war per se with, you
[Amit Varma]: know, worries about Japan invading and also because things I guess had reached that stage
[Amit Varma]: in the popular imagination where Gandhi was a popular figure and there was widespread
[Amit Varma]: support for Indian independence.
[Amit Varma]: But after the war, you know, America sort of turns his gaze away from South Asia and
[Amit Varma]: you mentioned two reasons for this.
[Guest]: Yeah, so the primary reason, of course, is the Americans are very preoccupied with much
[Guest]: of the rest of the world, right?
[Guest]: I mean, there is Western Europe and Eastern Europe, whose fate is yet to be decided.
[Guest]: The reconstruction of these economies have to be undertaken.
[Guest]: There is American sort of occupation in East Asia of Japan, Korea.
[Guest]: All of these are things which take up a lot more time and attention.
[Guest]: And the Americans are reasonably happy to let the British come back.
[Guest]: The Americans support broadly the attempts by the British in 1946 to actually keep India
[Guest]: together.
[Guest]: I know it, which, you know, in India, we tend to assume that the British always wanted to
[Guest]: partition India.
[Guest]: I mean, whatever be the divide and rule policy over a longer frame, the fact was that in
[Guest]: 1946, the British did want to keep India together, principally because India had proved to be
[Guest]: such a great strategic asset to the British Empire during the Second World War.
[Guest]: So because partition of India would have meant partition of the Indian Army, right?
[Guest]: So that was something the British were desperately trying to avoid.
[Guest]: And then the Americans were happy to sort of support that line.
[Guest]: And ultimately, of course, when partition kind of became inevitable, they went along
[Guest]: with it.
[Guest]: But again, in a sense, even subsequently, Americans would regret the fact that they
[Guest]: allowed the British to in some ways lead them by their noses, especially say when the Kashmir
[Guest]: issue came before the UN Security Council in 1948.
[Guest]: The American position on that particular dispute, which was very strongly shaped by British,
[Guest]: who in turn had wider concerns about Muslim populations in Palestine and what would happen
[Guest]: if they were seen as opposing Pakistan on this particular issue, because Kashmir was
[Guest]: a Muslim majority state and so on, right?
[Amit Varma]: So the British had a very...
[Amit Varma]: And the Americans were just like, hey, you guys know Kashmir better, so we'll defer to
[Guest]: you.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So they just allowed them to sort of do that.
[Guest]: And in some ways, you know, subsequently, Americans would say that, listen, maybe that
[Guest]: was not the best thing to do.
[Guest]: But nevertheless, given the range of other claims on their time and attention and energy,
[Guest]: that is what the Americans ended up doing.
[Guest]: And as I said, you know, things only start changing from the second half of 1950, when
[Guest]: North Korea attacked South Korea.
[Guest]: And there is now a major concern that the Soviet Union might actually strike similarly
[Guest]: at other places, particularly in the Persian Gulf, which was seen as very vulnerable.
[Guest]: And in that context, Americans then start thinking seriously about building alliances
[Guest]: to contain the Soviet Union in the Middle East and in Southeast Asia.
[Guest]: And in both these contexts, funnily enough, it's Pakistan, which is seen as the more chosen
[Guest]: partner.
[Guest]: And again, there, you know, you can talk about how the sort of stereotypical images of Hindus
[Guest]: and Muslims then gets transposed on to Indians and Pakistanis.
[Guest]: And Muslims being virile and warriors and Hindus being shifty and shady.
[Guest]: Effent and, you know, incapable.
[Guest]: The kipling sort of.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And what is interesting to me, and again, you know, these are the things that you learn
[Guest]: just by doing research, is how striking are those sort of tropes and themes and, you know,
[Guest]: those codes of thinking about this part of the world, you know, which go back to this
[Guest]: literature.
[Guest]: I mean, like kipling, for instance, I mean, like generations of Americans only knew the
[Guest]: subcontinent through kipling, right?
[Guest]: In that sense, you know, the influence of those ways of thinking was very strong.
[Guest]: So in a sense, and, you know, it is interesting that when the US-Pakistan alliance is concluded
[Guest]: in 1954, the Americans do hardly any serious assessment of what is it that Pakistan is
[Guest]: going to do for them by way of this alliance, except for assuming that Pakistan has somehow
[Guest]: a very great supply of, you know, Punjabi Muslims who can be fielded in uniforms against
[Guest]: the Red Army or somebody else.
[Guest]: And that, you know, this is, these are people who are sort of predisposed to fight in a
[Guest]: way that India.
[Guest]: And of course, there is a political problem as well, which is that India is non-aligned.
[Guest]: Jawaharlal Nehru has his own sort of views on the United States and its policies in Asia.
[Guest]: And that also adds to the sort of, you know, the sort of growing gulf between India and
[Amit Varma]: the United States.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the things that struck me was that at the moment of independence, you could probably
[Amit Varma]: say that there's a sort of a blank slate in South Asia, that Pakistan, India, they can
[Amit Varma]: turn whichever way.
[Amit Varma]: And at that point, Jinnah sort of takes a practical real politic view, he sees what
[Amit Varma]: is happening with, you know, that the US would need a counterpoint to the Soviet Union.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, you quote him as telling Margaret Bourke-White, quote, America needs Pakistan
[Amit Varma]: more than Pakistan needs America, unquote.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, you know, there are those overtures towards America.
[Amit Varma]: And in contrast, Nehru basically alienates the US in three ways.
[Amit Varma]: Number one, he has this whole philosophical approach that Asia is for Asians.
[Amit Varma]: So getting rid of colonialism doesn't only mean getting rid of the British, it means
[Amit Varma]: Asia is for Asians.
[Amit Varma]: The second approach is, of course, his whole approach towards a mixed economy and import
[Amit Varma]: substitution and so on, which doesn't at that time, align with the Americans ideology.
[Amit Varma]: And again, here again, ideology sort of coming into it.
[Amit Varma]: And the third is simply his personal arrogance towards Americans, because, you know, a lot
[Amit Varma]: of these early Indian freedom fighters were also in a sense, British liberals.
[Amit Varma]: And he takes that kind of snobbishness and attitude to his approach with the Americans.
[Guest]: That's right.
[Guest]: I think it's fair to say that, you know, all of the things that you mentioned are very
[Guest]: important issues in the way that US India relations unfolded in this early period.
[Guest]: Pakistan, you know, made a pitch for American assistance pretty quickly, you know, even
[Guest]: though for all of Janaz Bravado, I mean, the fact was that Pakistanis desperately needed
[Guest]: this thing.
[Guest]: And at that point of time, their concern was not so much military sort of counterweight
[Guest]: against India as economic aid, because it was a new state which is being created and
[Guest]: so on.
[Guest]: But of course, once the Kashmir issue came to the fore, and India and Pakistan were locked
[Guest]: in this sort of antagonism and were fighting a war and so on, it became clear to the Pakistanis
[Guest]: that in order to offset India's sort of superior military and economic capabilities, they needed
[Guest]: some kind of a counterweight.
[Guest]: So you have this sort of wooing of the Americans, which happens in the context of the Korean
[Guest]: War, etc.
[Guest]: culminating in the thing, right?
[Guest]: The second point is about economic philosophies and so on.
[Guest]: And again, what is interesting in the early period is that, yes, you know, as early as
[Guest]: 1939, when the Second World War was beginning, the Americans are, at least parts of the State
[Guest]: Department are starting to think about what do we need for the post-war world, right?
[Guest]: And one of the things that is very strong in American thinking is that the post-war
[Guest]: world should not have the problems that the interwar period had.
[Guest]: And they believe that one of the major reasons why you had this kind of aggression by Japan,
[Guest]: Germany, etc., was that the global economy had been broken up into various kinds of autarkic
[Guest]: blocks.
[Guest]: And one of those autarkic blocks, incidentally, during the Great Depression was that of the
[Guest]: British Commonwealth, right?
[Guest]: So, which is one of the  so opening up the British Commonwealth countries like India
[Guest]: and integrating them with the global markets was a very important part of the American
[Guest]: vision for the post-war world, right?
[Guest]: So the United States wanted very much to keep India in the capitalist sort of the thing
[Guest]: and believed that India has to be an important part of that story.
[Guest]: So the Americans were willing to cut India a lot of slack.
[Guest]: I mean, I don't think the problem was as much about India adopting a planned economic
[Guest]: growth model or even a mixed economy.
[Guest]: As with many of their other allies, the Americans were willing to sort of give a lot of, you
[Guest]: know, ground to countries to decide what was working for them, because their ultimate aim
[Guest]: was to ensure reconstruction, development and integration in a capitalist rather than
[Guest]: the socialist frame, right?
[Guest]: So that was the broader consideration.
[Guest]: But I think the, you know, there were issues over, say, American investments in the subcontinent,
[Guest]: which was interestingly enough, you know, opposed not just by the political class, but
[Guest]: by the Indian business community, right?
[Guest]: I mean, if you think of all the people who wrote the Bombay Plan of 1944, they were the
[Guest]: same people who are constantly reminding Jawaharlal Nehru that, you know, do not, you know, liberalize
[Guest]: your sort of industrial policy, etc.
[Guest]: Because they thought that India has to have the space for Indian capitalism to come up.
[Amit Varma]: Well, out of self-interest, because they wanted to protect their own interest.
[Guest]: And then they believe that, you know, so far, the experience of having been working with
[Guest]: British capital in India in such a big way, was that Indian capital is always sort of,
[Guest]: you know, never allowed to grow.
[Guest]: And they believe that this independence also meant an opportunity to create a national
[Guest]: economic space with an Indian sort of capitalist sort of lead development happening, right?
[Guest]: So there was that kind of a thing.
[Guest]: But the Americans also had other kinds of differences with India, right?
[Guest]: For instance, Americans throughout the first and the second five year plan, which if you
[Guest]: say is the first decade after Indian independence, really, through the 1950s, were insisting
[Guest]: that India was focusing too much on heavy industrialization, not paying enough attention
[Guest]: to agriculture, right?
[Guest]: And even though India did not actually go with American priorities, Americans gave enormous
[Guest]: amounts of economic aid to India.
[Guest]: I mean, if you think of something like the second five year plan, you know, there were
[Guest]: such large financing gaps in the plan that even the planners themselves assumed that
[Guest]: this money would materialize from somewhere and that somewhere was the United States of
[Guest]: America, which was only dollar surplus country, so to speak.
[Guest]: So in that context, Americans were willing to sort of, you know, despite these differences,
[Guest]: they would have sort of accommodated.
[Guest]: The third point which is saying is quite interesting and important, which is about Jawaharlal
[Guest]: Nehru's attitudes towards the United States and its policies in Asia, but also towards
[Guest]: the United States itself, right?
[Guest]: So on the policy front, I think it's fair to say that Nehru believed that the United
[Guest]: States, you know, in the post war period was in effect, creating divisions amongst Asian
[Guest]: countries by continuing to hold on to military bases in Japan and other places.
[Guest]: And that US policy in some ways was a very sort of destabilizing element in this region.
[Guest]: And that was a major source of sort of, you know, clash of worldviews, so to speak, between
[Guest]: these two countries.
[Guest]: And of course, you know, Jawaharlal Nehru, as you rightly point out, I think it's fair
[Guest]: to say, had, you know, had a degree of contempt for the Americans as a bunch of parvenu capitalists,
[Guest]: you know, which mirrored the attitudes of the British aristocracy more than that of
[Guest]: anything else.
[Guest]: In fact, there is a very oft quoted line in the memoirs of Dean Acheson, who was President
[Guest]: Truman's Secretary of State, and he says that, you know, when I met Jawaharlal Nehru, I was
[Guest]: reminded of Queen Victoria's statement about Prime Minister William Gladstone.
[Guest]: And she said that he spoke to me as if he was addressing a public meeting.
[Guest]: And you know, in a sense, that's the way that we felt about Jawaharlal Nehru as well.
[Guest]: So there was definitely that kind of a cultural gulf as well.
[Amit Varma]: And Nehru once very condescendingly told JRD Tata, do not speak to me of profit, it is
[Amit Varma]: a dirty word.
[Amit Varma]: And I suppose that attitude carries through to how he looked at American capitalism.
[Amit Varma]: But also, perhaps there is some amount of animus, as you've pointed out in the book,
[Amit Varma]: through, you know, incidents like, for example, the denial of the sterling that was owed to
[Amit Varma]: India, which, you know, which America kind of supported that not being given to India.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, that's one reason to hold a grudge.
[Amit Varma]: Another reason to hold a grudge is the stand that America took on Kashmir, where they just
[Amit Varma]: supported the British, which, you know, in retrospect, like you said, it's completely
[Amit Varma]: reasonable, but Nehru sitting at that vantage point of history probably did not view it
[Amit Varma]: in that way and, you know, just saw them as the enemy.
[Guest]: Yeah, that's right.
[Guest]: And I think in general, the American decision to align with Pakistan in 1954, in some ways
[Guest]: was a major turning point in their engagement with the subcontinent, not just with India,
[Guest]: right.
[Guest]: So of course, India Pakistan relations over Kashmir and, you know, and then the American
[Guest]: alliance had an impact on India US relations.
[Guest]: But we also forget there was a second non aligned country in the subcontinent, Afghanistan
[Guest]: at that point of time, which also had very serious problems with Pakistan, primarily
[Guest]: over this, you know, disputed boundary area, which they refer to as Pashtunistan, where
[Guest]: the community called Pashtuns used to live on either side of that.
[Guest]: And there was a fairly strong Pashtun nationalist sentiment on either side, including such stalwart
[Guest]: people as Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan, who was known as frontier Gandhi, who was a sort of
[Guest]: a major advocate of the sort of Pashtun unity movement.
[Guest]: And we also, you know, should recall that Afghanistan was one of the few countries which
[Guest]: opposed the entry of Pakistan into the United Nations in 1948.
[Guest]: So you know, the animosity was actually pretty strong there.
[Guest]: And you had a parallel development in Afghan Pakistan relations, as what happened with
[Guest]: India Pakistan relations, where American alliance with Pakistan in some ways, really throws
[Guest]: the Afghans off the rails.
[Guest]: And of course, we must remember that in that case, they were the weaker of the two parties.
[Guest]: So in a sense, you have a strange constellation of India and Afghanistan on either side of
[Guest]: Pakistan, both of which are ostensibly non aligned countries.
[Guest]: But after the Americans sort of drive towards forging an alliance with Pakistan, end up
[Guest]: building ties with the Soviet Union, right.
[Guest]: And that, of course, coincides with the rise of Nikita Khrushchev, who's also open to dealing
[Guest]: with non aligned countries is not as ideologically sort of minded as Stalin was and had a more
[Guest]: pragmatic view of what the Soviet Union wanted to do.
[Guest]: And in some ways, you know, the US sort of alliance with Pakistan really draws a line
[Guest]: through the subcontinent.
[Amit Varma]: And it makes it inevitable that India and Afghanistan then have no choice, they have
[Amit Varma]: to sort of gravitate towards the Soviet Union eventually.
[Guest]: Yeah, so you know, as historians are generally sort of very averse to saying anything was
[Guest]: inevitable.
[Guest]: So I think, yeah, it's, it's, it's, it's, in a sense, the logic of it then becomes difficult
[Guest]: to escape, especially when you have a leader like Khrushchev, who is willing to sort of
[Guest]: give you things, right.
[Guest]: See, with someone like Stalin, for instance, you know, India had absolutely no relationship
[Guest]: with the Soviet Union in the first, you know, five, six years after Indian independence.
[Guest]: Because there was an Indian Communist Party, which was opposed to Indian Azadi and stuff.
[Guest]: And this, you know, the government was cracking down on them at home.
[Guest]: So there's no question of sort of having any good relationship with Soviet Union.
[Guest]: You know, Nehru sent his own sister Vijayalakshmi Pandit as ambassador to Soviet Union.
[Guest]: She never even got to meet Stalin.
[Guest]: The first Indian ambassador who ever got to meet Stalin was Sarvapalli Radhakrishnan.
[Guest]: And that Radhakrishnan was, you know, more or less sort of bulldozed his way through
[Guest]: and had a chat with Stalin and so on, right.
[Guest]: It's only after Stalin's death, that there is a slow reorientation of Soviet attitudes
[Guest]: towards India.
[Guest]: So in a sense, you know, if it was not just because of what Americans did, but also what
[Guest]: was happening in the Soviet Union.
[Guest]: So you had this, once again, a constellation of things, which brings India and Afghanistan,
[Guest]: you know, in a much more favorable relationship with the Soviet Union.
[Guest]: The Soviet Union is willing to sort of bankroll things in Afghanistan, they're willing to
[Guest]: bankroll things in India.
[Guest]: But at least as far as India is concerned, the United States, however, continued to remain
[Guest]: much more important in economic terms.
[Guest]: You know, we tend to think of the Indian economy as somehow being very influenced by the Soviet
[Guest]: model and so on.
[Guest]: I think that's actually fundamentally wrong.
[Guest]: There are aspects also with planned economy model, which we did take in, especially ideas
[Guest]: like the plan frame.
[Guest]: But you know, a lot of your economic plans were vetted by American economists who used
[Guest]: to come to India, who used to stay and spend time as actors consultants to your planning
[Guest]: commission.
[Guest]: So and then the Americans, as I said, you know, were very important in bridging the
[Guest]: financial deficit, which our plans had almost from the very beginning.
[Amit Varma]: Right, we'll cover the economics later.
[Amit Varma]: But that whole decision of the US to sort of adopt Pakistan in a sense also sets a permanent
[Amit Varma]: dissonance in place.
[Amit Varma]: And that dissonance is in fact, reflected in the title of your book itself.
[Amit Varma]: You know, Bill Clinton had once called the Pakistan Afghanistan border the most dangerous
[Amit Varma]: place in the world.
[Amit Varma]: And Obama had later used the same phrase for the India Pakistan border.
[Amit Varma]: And the American approaches to these two borders, in terms of principles, is completely different.
[Amit Varma]: That on the one hand, when it comes to the border with India, they'll support the whole
[Amit Varma]: Kashmir movement, you know, which Pakistan is deeply interested in.
[Amit Varma]: But on the other border, they won't support the Pashtunistan movement.
[Amit Varma]: And similarly, on one border, they are very concerned about clamping down on terror entirely.
[Amit Varma]: And on the other border for a long time, it was kind of a wink and not kind of thing that
[Amit Varma]: you sort of let it happen.
[Amit Varma]: And would you say that this is something that kind of began at that period and has continued
[Amit Varma]: since and this is a sort of a dissonance that it's hard to come to terms with?
[Guest]: Yeah, it is.
[Guest]: But from the American point of view, you know, it's rarely the case that in international
[Guest]: politics, you're going to be able to apply the same principles in all places, right.
[Guest]: And in fact, I quote one of the Americans as telling the Afghans that, listen, we were
[Guest]: the ones who invented the term self determination.
[Guest]: We can also tell you that doesn't apply to the Pashtuns.
[Guest]: So in a sense, obviously, larger political and other kinds of interests do come to the
[Guest]: fore.
[Guest]: But at the same time, I think it's fair to say that at least after 1963, the Americans
[Guest]: made no serious attempt to sort of intervene in the Kashmir dispute.
[Guest]: 1963 really was the last time because India in the wake of the war with China and the
[Guest]: defeat against China was looking to the United States for military supplies.
[Guest]: The United States was, Kennedy administration was giving those military supplies.
[Guest]: The Pakistanis and Ayub Khan protested and the Americans felt that maybe this is a good
[Guest]: opportunity to try and see if some kind of a solution could be done in Kashmir.
[Guest]: And that broadly speaking was the last time the Americans actually directly ever get involved
[Guest]: in that play, right.
[Guest]: And their whole idea is that, listen, we need the subcontinent to be stable, which is to
[Guest]: say we don't want wars.
[Guest]: We don't want arms races out here.
[Guest]: We want these countries to develop broadly on capitalist lines and clearly stay away
[Guest]: from the Soviet camp, right.
[Guest]: So in a sense, you had some kind of minimal objectives, which if they were met, you know,
[Guest]: life would be going on.
[Guest]: But then, of course, you know, a range of other concentrations come into play from the
[Guest]: 1970s.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, Pakistan has been a failed state for so long that we don't realize that
[Amit Varma]: it wasn't always thus.
[Amit Varma]: And you point out that, you know, between 59 and 69, when Ayub Khan was in charge, Pakistan
[Amit Varma]: pretty much took the economic direction which the US wanted them to take and it worked for
[Guest]: them.
[Guest]: They were doing well.
[Guest]: Yeah, exactly.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, that decade in some ways is Ayub Khan was celebrating as this decade
[Guest]: of development, of course.
[Guest]: But the reality was that the Pakistanis were much more amenable to American suggestions
[Guest]: on their models of planned economic development.
[Guest]: The Pakistan Planning Commission was also very strongly supported by a group of economists
[Guest]: based at Harvard called the Harvard Group of Economists.
[Guest]: And in a sense, they undertook many of the things that India was not willing to take.
[Guest]: For instance, Pakistan embraced the Green Revolution technologies before India did,
[Guest]: right, and never quite faced the same degree of constraints.
[Guest]: They allowed for a system of sort of, you know, put in place a fiscal infrastructure
[Guest]: of tax breaks and such like things, which allowed for capital accumulation to happen
[Guest]: much stronger.
[Guest]: And this thing and Pakistan had access to certain kinds of markets.
[Guest]: So that's a decade when you see Pakistan is actually economically doing better than India,
[Guest]: at least in terms of growth rates and such like things.
[Guest]: And there is a sense that, you know, you have a regime which might be authoritarian, but
[Guest]: it's still delivering, right, which is the sort of model that American political scientists
[Guest]: like Samuel Huntington actually hail as a good way of thinking about it, which is to
[Guest]: say that what, you know, democracy and such like things may not be the most important
[Guest]: thing for the developing world.
[Guest]: It is stability, which is given by an authoritarian figure, who is nevertheless also a benevolent
[Amit Varma]: authoritarian figure, because he can deliver.
[Guest]: So sort of a redefinition of that manifest destiny where it's not just delivering liberty,
[Guest]: but delivering whatever we feel the need.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: So in essence, you have that kind of a thing and Pakistani thing.
[Guest]: But what is also clear is that by the end of the decade, by 1969, the sort of the lopsidedness
[Guest]: of the Pakistani growth story also comes to this thing, right?
[Guest]: And that lopsidedness broadly happens along two axes.
[Guest]: The first is that of sort of, you know, excessive concentration of wealth amongst a very small
[Guest]: group of corporates and families really, I mean, like, you know, like the parts of the
[Guest]: subcontinent family owned businesses is the model in Pakistan as well.
[Guest]: And the Pakistan Planning Commission's head in 1968, actually discloses in an interview
[Guest]: that you know, some 22 families in the country actually own over 95% of the wealth, right?
[Guest]: I mean, and then it's a shocking thing because, you know, you had this.
[Guest]: The second axis along which there is this kind of lopsided growth is the West Pakistan,
[Guest]: which is Pakistan as we know it today, is getting much more of investment resources.
[Guest]: Industrialization is happening there at a much stronger pace than what is happening
[Guest]: in East Pakistan, today's Bangladesh.
[Guest]: And that leads to a major gulf between the two wings of Pakistan.
[Guest]: And it's interesting that the Pakistani Planning Commission is actually staffed almost entirely
[Guest]: by Bengali economists, right?
[Guest]: So the guys who are writing the plans know very well that, you know, these things are
[Guest]: in some way.
[Guest]: So they come up with this whole narrative of saying that, you know, this economic growth
[Guest]: model is essentially neo-colonial, because we are providing agricultural sort of inputs
[Guest]: and you know, all the investment and industrialization is happening in the West.
[Guest]: And you know, that's supposed to be the sort of dependency model, you know, so to speak.
[Guest]: So in a sense, the sort of American assisted economic policies do extract a toll.
[Guest]: And that in some ways leads to the collapse of the Ayub Khan regime in 1969.
[Guest]: The set of protests in both East and West Pakistan and leads to the overthrow of the
[Guest]: military dictatorship.
[Guest]: And then of course, that also sets in train a series of events which leads to the liberation
[Guest]: of Bangladesh in 1971.
[Amit Varma]: And according to you, and you've of course written a whole separate book on this, but
[Amit Varma]: even in this book, you devote some time to it, that 71 is absolutely critical, not just
[Amit Varma]: to the subcontinent itself in terms of India, Pakistan, Afghanistan, but also the way the
[Amit Varma]: US perceives the region as a whole.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, in the 70s, everything kind of changes, you know, where the Cold War becomes
[Amit Varma]: less relevant and other factors come into play.
[Guest]: That's right.
[Guest]: And I think 71 is important because, you know, if you look at the period, say in the run
[Guest]: up to the in the 1960s, right, I mean, especially the second half of the 1960s, the United States
[Guest]: is kind of disengaging from the subcontinent a little bit.
[Guest]: Under Lyndon Johnson, the United States is increasingly involved in the war in Vietnam.
[Guest]: During the 1965 war between India and Pakistan, the Americans kind of take more or less what
[Guest]: I call a plague on both your houses kind of attitude, right?
[Guest]: They impose arms embargoes on both sides, they say we're not going to give any aid and
[Guest]: so on.
[Guest]: And ultimately, when the post war conference is held, it is held by the Soviet Union.
[Guest]: It's in Tashkent, that's where Lal Bahadur Shastri dies, right?
[Guest]: So it's a very interesting thing that for the first time, the United States actually
[Guest]: allows the Soviet Union to take the lead in settling the geopolitical affairs of the subcontinent.
[Guest]: Why is this?
[Guest]: Because of American involvement in Vietnam.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: Johnson just decides that, listen, these are incorrigible countries, you know, let the
[Guest]: Soviets go and break their head against that wall if they want to, you know, he has to
[Guest]: worry about great society at home, he has to worry about Vietnam abroad, right?
[Guest]: So his priorities are pretty full.
[Guest]: And that's, you know, the Civil Rights Bill is being sort of activated at the time.
[Guest]: So lots of things happening.
[Guest]: So there's a period of kind of disengagement.
[Guest]: But then once you have the Nixon administration come in, they come in with a very different
[Guest]: set of priorities, which is to say that they want to get out of Vietnam, but get out in
[Guest]: an honorable fashion, right?
[Guest]: So an American exit has to be sort of orchestrated in such a way that it does not seem as a scoot
[Guest]: and run.
[Guest]: And in that context, they believe that the United States will need to sort of reach out
[Guest]: to China, which is seen as a country which will allow them to sort of, you know, influence
[Guest]: North Vietnam to the negotiating table and such like things.
[Guest]: In order to reach to China, the Americans decide to sort of go through Pakistan because
[Guest]: Pakistan and China have a good relationship going back to 1962-63 when India and China
[Guest]: have fought, right?
[Guest]: So Yahya Khan, who's the new military dictator of Pakistan, actually acts as a conduit between
[Guest]: the Nixon administration and the Chinese leadership.
[Guest]: And in that context, the Pakistanis and the Yahya Khan regime acquires an importance in
[Guest]: the Nixon administration's mind, which is kind of out of proportion to anything the
[Guest]: Pakistanis were doing at that point of time, partly because Americans were doing it, the
[Guest]: Nixon administration was doing it so secretively.
[Guest]: I mean, Nixon did not even inform his own sort of senior cabinet officials about this
[Guest]: stuff, right?
[Guest]: It was all done in a hush-hush way.
[Guest]: And because of this extreme drive towards secrecy and need to sort of keep especially
[Guest]: congressional Republicans out of the frame, because you're reaching out to China, the
[Guest]: old enemy, right?
[Guest]: They want to do it completely through a secret channel and Pakistan becomes important.
[Guest]: But this opening up to Pakistan and Kissinger visits Pakistan in summer of 1971.
[Guest]: And after that, it's out in the open.
[Guest]: That coincides, of course, with the onset of the Bangladesh crisis, which has begun
[Guest]: with the crackdown of the Pakistan army on the Bengalis in March.
[Guest]: By the end of summer 1971, you have an estimated 10 million refugees on Indian soil.
[Guest]: And it is quite clear that this is an issue which is, you know, definitely going to escalate
[Guest]: very soon.
[Guest]: And the Americans at that point of time, take a very pro-Pakistan line.
[Guest]: In a sense, it is arguable about whether the United States actually needed to do that in
[Guest]: order to pursue even its own hard-nosed interests with China.
[Guest]: Because what we know from Chinese sources and other things is that the Chinese themselves
[Guest]: were telling the Pakistanis to sort of back away from that kind of an extreme military
[Guest]: action against the Bengalis.
[Guest]: But the Americans wouldn't want to do it.
[Guest]: And finally, when the war happened, the United States took a very antagonistic position towards
[Guest]: India.
[Guest]: They cut off all economic aid to India.
[Guest]: They cut off all military aid to India, of course, even earlier.
[Guest]: And then they sent the sort of, you know, the 7th Fleet with, you know, aircraft carrier
[Guest]: with nuclear weapons on board to the Bay of Bengal in an attempt to intimidate the Indians.
[Guest]: And of course, the Americans claim that Nixon Kissinger believed, you know, or whatever,
[Guest]: they used it as a pretext that the Indians were going to attack West Pakistan and not
[Guest]: just East and so on.
[Guest]: So whatever be the reasons, the reality was that that episode really sort of ends up marking
[Amit Varma]: a deep rupture in US India relations.
[Amit Varma]: And the Indians just had moved into Dhaka before really anything much happened.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So in a sense, I mean, nothing happened in a real sense, but it left behind a legacy,
[Guest]: which was, you know, which was very difficult to sort of pick up pieces.
[Guest]: And also for Pakistan, because Pakistanis believe that Americans actually did not help
[Guest]: them very much during this, right.
[Guest]: So, so, so you again have a period of disengagement with Pakistan, US Pakistan relations, US India
[Guest]: relations are very turbulent.
[Guest]: And one sort of knock on consequence of the 1971 thing, which in some ways goes to your
[Guest]: point, which is the recalibration of American sort of priorities in the subcontinent in
[Guest]: the mid 1970s, was the Indian decision to test nuclear weapons, which was at least given
[Guest]: a certain impetus by the 1971 crisis and what happened during that time.
[Guest]: And you know, in 1974, India goes nuclear and preventing India from, you know, becoming
[Guest]: a proliferator is a very important American priority from there on.
[Guest]: So nuclear weapons as a whole and subcontinent, it's worth pointing out that the Pakistanis
[Guest]: were already thinking about starting a nuclear program by 1972, soon after their country
[Guest]: had been divided.
[Guest]: So it's not as if they started only after the Indian tests, but the Indian tests again
[Guest]: given impetus to the Pakistani program.
[Guest]: The second thing which happens in the 1970s, which I think, again, marks a complete break
[Guest]: from the old Cold War priorities is the rise of what you might refer to as political Islam
[Guest]: or Islamism in Pakistan with the advent of Zia ul Haq.
[Guest]: But even before that, with Pakistani support to groups like the Jamaat-e-Islami of Afghanistan,
[Guest]: which the Pakistanis were using in order to basically keep the Afghan regime from making
[Guest]: claims on Pashtunistan, right?
[Guest]: And now once the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan happens in 1979, the whole dimension of using
[Guest]: the Islamist fighters, they call them freedom fighters, Mujahideen, to drive the Soviet
[Guest]: Union out becomes a major priority for the United States, both the last parts of the
[Guest]: Carter administration and the Reagan administration, a lot of effort is spent in the subcontinent
[Guest]: on doing this.
[Guest]: But that also means that you're also turning a blind eye to Pakistani sort of efforts at
[Guest]: acquiring their own nuclear weapon, which the Americans know very well about, right?
[Guest]: And we now know from declassified American documents, which I've used in reconstructing
[Guest]: that particular part of the story, that the Americans confronted Zia ul Haq about his
[Guest]: nuclear programs with evidence, you know, which obviously they had collected through
[Guest]: technical and other intelligence sources and allowed Zia to sort of get away with evasive
[Guest]: lies and not just that, but gave congressional certification under the Reagan administration
[Guest]: successively saying that the Pakistanis are not pursuing a bomb, right?
[Guest]: So in a sense, the period between 1975 and 87, 88, in many ways, you encounter a set
[Guest]: of problems, which I think mark the major concerns for the Americans today.
[Guest]: If the Americans today believe that the subcontinent, or at least they've sort of said that is the
[Guest]: most dangerous place, it is because of this confluence of nuclear weapons and, you know,
[Guest]: these jihadi forces, which ultimately are the sort of ultimate nightmare of every American
[Guest]: administration when it comes to subcontinent.
[Guest]: That somehow, you know, one of these guys is going to get hold of one of those devices
[Guest]: or materials and so on.
[Guest]: And but the problem goes back to the mid seventies.
[Guest]: And so which is why I say that in some ways, you know, from the mid seventies, it's not
[Guest]: just the old Cold War priorities of saying we need Pakistan to contain the Soviet Union
[Amit Varma]: and so on, but a completely new set of issues which comes to the fore.
[Amit Varma]: And so here's my question.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, the US then takes a bunch of decisions around supporting Islamism and around backing
[Amit Varma]: Zia, funding the ISI, backing the Mujahideen and so on and so forth, which have grave historical
[Amit Varma]: consequences a couple of decades onwards.
[Amit Varma]: But at that time, strategically must have seemed completely reasonable and the only
[Amit Varma]: thing to do.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, what are the counterfactuals here?
[Amit Varma]: Could they have done anything differently?
[Amit Varma]: Like, is it fair to now point a finger and say that, hey, you know, you created Osama?
[Amit Varma]: Or was there something at the time they could have done differently without the benefit
[Guest]: of hindsight?
[Guest]: Well, I mean, so I think it's fair to say that, you know, the Americans did not create
[Guest]: Osama in any straightforward sense of the word, right?
[Guest]: But the reality is that the United States supported a group of people, you know, various
[Guest]: kinds of Islamist guerrillas and allowed Pakistan to build a sort of an infrastructure to support
[Guest]: and utilize these groups, over which Americans had very little oversight and basically got
[Guest]: the Saudis to match their contributions all in the name of doing this.
[Guest]: And actually, towards the far end of it, ended up giving very dangerous systems to the Mujahideen,
[Guest]: including the infamous Stinger missiles, you know, which they were bringing down sort of
[Guest]: surface to air missiles, handheld surface to air missiles.
[Guest]: And the Americans spent the better part of the late 1980s actually trying to buy those
[Guest]: from black markets all over the world, right?
[Guest]: So those are very counterproductive things.
[Guest]: So in a sense, while, you know, their desire to sort of get the Soviets out of Afghanistan
[Guest]: might have been understandable, you know, it's not clear to me that this was necessarily
[Guest]: the best way of doing it.
[Guest]: And what is interesting is that the problems with these approaches were pointed out to
[Guest]: them at that point of time.
[Guest]: It's not that we are talking about this stuff with a post 9-11 kind of view, right?
[Guest]: I mean, if you look at the records of conversation, we now have a few of them between Rajiv Gandhi
[Guest]: and officials in the Reagan administration.
[Guest]: The Indians are constantly pointing out, you know, it's actually quite, it is almost a
[Guest]: replay of what is happening in the mid 2000s, where, you know, the Indians are constantly
[Guest]: pointing out to them saying that, listen, look at the kind of people you're supporting,
[Guest]: Gulbuddin, Hikmatyar, I mean, people like them are genuinely extremists.
[Guest]: And that if you are going to give, allow these groups to sort of come to power in Afghanistan,
[Guest]: it is going to lead to a great degree of instability in the region and we are not just saying it
[Guest]: for ourselves, but on the whole, right?
[Guest]: I mean, in that sense, and of course, as I said, I mean, not just the sort of allowing
[Guest]: these groups to sort of take place, but allowing Pakistan to sort of develop a nuclear weapons
[Guest]: program covertly and assisting them in effect, you know, by sort of allowing them to do this
[Guest]: stuff was a deadly cocktail.
[Guest]: And again, I don't think these are only criticisms which can be made with the benefit of hindsight.
[Guest]: I think people are pointing it out at that point of time, that these were dangerous policies.
[Guest]: And that the acquisition of nuclear weapons by Pakistan in such a covert manner would
[Guest]: have very destabilizing consequences or support for these kinds of groups.
[Guest]: Of course, someone like Osama bin Laden was in the play even then, but I don't think I
[Guest]: think it's fair to say that he was not a very important player.
[Guest]: But nevertheless, that was a milieu.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, that was an unintended consequence, obviously.
[Guest]: I mean, I think, I mean, what was unforeseeable at that point of time was that, you know,
[Guest]: some of these people would then target America much later, but then you had to have a series
[Guest]: of intervening events, right?
[Guest]: I mean, you have to have the American sort of participation in the Gulf War, their presence
[Guest]: in Saudi Arabia, which then led Osama to sort of, you know, think of Americans as the sort
[Amit Varma]: of most important enemy and so on.
[Guest]: It's that perfect storm of events, if we may call it that.
[Guest]: So, I mean, that is subsequent history.
[Guest]: I mean, I think we should not be anachronistic by reading later events into that point of
[Guest]: time.
[Guest]: But at that point of time, you know, even the characters with whom the Americans dealt,
[Guest]: many of whom those dramatic person are still around.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, just earlier this year, we had Gulbuddin Hekmatyar walking back into
[Guest]: Kabul, which for people who live through their generation was an extraordinary sort of event,
[Guest]: because this man kind of was single-handedly responsible for the destruction of Kabul by
[Guest]: artillery firing, you know, in the early 90s.
[Guest]: And these are people with some very, very unsavory past.
[Amit Varma]: So, so while, you know, this whole conflict is kind of blowing up and, you know, this
[Amit Varma]: is almost like a new front or a new narrative in the old front.
[Amit Varma]: Even old story comes to an end, the Cold War ends very abruptly when the Soviet Union collapses.
[Amit Varma]: And shortly after that, you have India's liberalization.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, these have dual consequences.
[Amit Varma]: One of course is that the Cold War imperatives no longer really matter.
[Amit Varma]: And the other is that the ideological tension between the US and India now seems to be coming
[Amit Varma]: to an end because India has opened up.
[Amit Varma]: And the third consequence of this is that the third strand apart from power and ideology,
[Amit Varma]: which you speak of is culture, and American culture, which was already popular in India,
[Amit Varma]: but now essentially enters and takes over young India.
[Guest]: Yeah, I think absolutely.
[Guest]: So I, you know, and I think you have to bring each of these various strands into the frame
[Guest]: to quite understand why US India relations have really transformed in the post Cold War
[Guest]: period, right?
[Guest]: I mean, why is it that two countries which were sort of divided on sort of political,
[Guest]: economic grounds had these cultural gaps, which as we've discussed now, you know, quite
[Guest]: sort of important, persistent, and so on, managed to actually come together in that
[Guest]: period.
[Guest]: And I think the answer to that is not just the end of the Cold War, because in some ways,
[Guest]: US India relations were already improving even before the Cold War ended, right?
[Guest]: I mean, and, you know, the declassified documents that we now have access to, I think suggests
[Guest]: that Rajiv Gandhi in some ways was the most pro American Prime Minister that you had in
[Guest]: independent India up to that point of time.
[Guest]: He understood that, you know, for whatever big visions that he had for India as a sort
[Guest]: of 21st century country, which needed to get into computers and all of that stuff, some
[Guest]: sort of story of modernization.
[Guest]: The United States was going to be very important.
[Guest]: And Rajiv Gandhi was, you know, tried very hard to develop good relations with the Reagan
[Guest]: administration, you know, to get all of this high technology transfer, of course, there
[Guest]: were issues still over a range of things.
[Guest]: But you know, you again understood that once the Soviet Union was going through whatever
[Guest]: glassnost, perestroika, etc, under Gorbachev, that the old Cold War dimensions were no longer
[Guest]: going to play.
[Guest]: So in a sense, tilt towards the United States starts happening even before the Soviet Union
[Unknown]: starts.
[Guest]: Of course, it's accelerated completely by the collapse of the Soviet Union, because
[Guest]: that takes away a complete anchor of global politics, right?
[Guest]: I mean, so it's a dramatic change not to minimize its impact.
[Guest]: But some of the shift was already happening, right?
[Guest]: The second, of course, was, as you're saying, you know, something which is actually a bit
[Guest]: of a coincidence, which is the sort of the whatever, you know, the sort of balance of
[Guest]: payment crisis, which again, you know, it could have happened anytime during the Adi
[Guest]: Gandhi's period, because in some ways, it is actually, you know, again, that's where
[Guest]: the law of unintended consequences, right?
[Guest]: One of the reasons, one of the sort of advantages of going closer to the United States during
[Guest]: this period for the Indians also was that you wanted access to capital markets for external
[Guest]: commercial borrowing.
[Guest]: And the Americans are happy to sort of because they don't want to sort of do economic aid
[Guest]: for India, they see India as a much bigger economy, there's no economic aid, but you
[Guest]: can borrow in the markets and stuff.
[Guest]: And once Indian borrowing on Western American sort of Wall Street and other places starts
[Guest]: picking up, that is when you know, the problems for your later period are being stored up,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: I mean, and that's, that's where the crisis comes, actually.
[Guest]: So in a sense, but it's an independent development.
[Guest]: And then your back is up against the wall, you have to sort of reform.
[Guest]: And for the first time, at least since the 1930s, India is accepts that, you know, embrace
[Guest]: of globalization is a good thing for us.
[Guest]: And that I think is an important, not just from an ideological point of view, but from
[Guest]: practical American perspective, right?
[Guest]: Because what you had was, you know, this kind of closed economy or with limited access to
[Guest]: the external world, where aid is the main driver of relationship, etc.
[Guest]: Inhibited certain forms of things that Americans want, right?
[Guest]: So in that sense, the, but the opening up of the Indian economy also had other kinds
[Guest]: of cultural consequences, because the Americans were now able to bring to the subcontinent
[Guest]: what other historians of Europe have called, you know, the commercial imperium, so to speak,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: The Emporium as the Imperium, as one of them puts it, right, which is to say that, you
[Guest]: know, in a sense, that is a very important part of America's allure and its leadership
[Guest]: in the 20th century is the extraordinary sort of cultural impact that American, you know,
[Guest]: sort of commercial practices and models have persisted.
[Guest]: And you, of course, would remember when MTV came to India, right?
[Unknown]: I mean, what was there?
[Guest]: So, you know, for people of our generation, I suppose we've lived through some of these
[Guest]: changes.
[Guest]: So, and they were very striking changes.
[Guest]: And I think what a current generation, younger generation of Indians takes for granted was
[Guest]: a transformation that, you know, people like us live through.
[Amit Varma]: And I think we often take like American cultural power for granted.
[Amit Varma]: Like I watched a talk of yours on YouTube, which you gave at Goa.
[Amit Varma]: And one of your fellow panelists, Professor Varun Sani, made a very interesting point
[Amit Varma]: that if you just look at how culture permeates across the world and the differences between
[Amit Varma]: American culture and other cultures, is that anybody can wear a sari, but a sari would
[Amit Varma]: look like fancy dress on a foreigner.
[Amit Varma]: But anybody can wear blue jeans and completely it just seems natural.
[Amit Varma]: And we are all in a sense, even old fogies like us who are in our 40s, but even we are
[Amit Varma]: like far more American, culturally, than we realize otherwise.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So, I think that the important shift which happens in the 90s, right, is that, you know,
[Guest]: because the India in which people of our age sort of grew up, right?
[Guest]: I mean, the way I think about it, you know, there was a culture of conspicuous non consumption,
[Unknown]: right?
[Guest]: You know, the Indian elites almost would go out of their way to say that, listen, we are
[Guest]: wearing khadi and that, you know, you don't want to sort of this thing, there's no alcohol
[Guest]: permitted in official functions, etc, etc, right?
[Guest]: I mean, the whole gamut of, you know, there is a very self conscious sense that you want
[Guest]: to sort of have this non consumption attitude, right?
[Guest]: Which changes, which changes quite dramatically.
[Guest]: And that allows them for a range of things.
[Guest]: And I think, you know, what Varun Sani was saying there, and which I would put it in
[Guest]: slightly different ways, but I think the point remains the same, which is that, you know,
[Guest]: people tend to sort of criticize, especially, you know, Europeans, especially Europeans
[Guest]: of early 20th century, when American commercial culture first landed up in Europe after the
[Guest]: First World War.
[Guest]: The European old elite used to sort of snigger at American culture and say, listen, how can
[Guest]: you call this stuff culture, right?
[Guest]: I mean, culture is what we had, Bildung is what Germans had, you know, we had this, you
[Guest]: know, this whole sort of heritage of high culture of the West.
[Guest]: But the reality is that American popular culture is attractive precisely because it's shallow.
[Guest]: It is its very shallowness that allows it to sort of inhabit various domains, right?
[Guest]: So for one of the things I talk about in this book, which again, is kind of, you know, people
[Guest]: like as a witness to our lives, is the establishment of McDonald's chains in this country, right?
[Guest]: How a brand like McDonald's has adapted itself to the Indian market, right?
[Guest]: I mean, I've just come from a week in Japan, you can't get the stuff that you get in McDonald's
[Guest]: here in any McDonald's in Japan, right?
[Guest]: And then the stuff that they give in McDonald's in Japan, I've not even eaten McDonald's in
[Guest]: the United States, right?
[Guest]: So, so the ability to sort of nestle into various cultural contexts is there primarily
[Guest]: because of this quality that we tend to dismiss as shallow, or as you know, easy to adapt,
[Guest]: but that adaptability is what counts, right?
[Guest]: I mean, how many people are going to take the pains to watch Chinese opera?
[Guest]: And what do you think are the odds that China will be able to sort of exercise the same
[Guest]: degree of cultural influence?
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: Because Chinese language is much harder to learn and so on.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, you know, Francis Fukuyama once prematurely spoke of the end of history.
[Amit Varma]: And in a sense, it would seem that in the 90s, you also have an end to the conflict
[Amit Varma]: between the US and India, because on all three fronts, you know, the power front, the Cold
[Amit Varma]: War is over, it no longer matters, India is no longer a Soviet ally.
[Amit Varma]: In the ideological front, India's becoming a capitalist economy.
[Amit Varma]: On the cultural front, America is basically taking over.
[Amit Varma]: And you think that everything's going to be hunky dory from now, but of course, you know,
[Amit Varma]: Fukuyama was premature.
[Amit Varma]: And even in the context of India US relations, everything changes with 9-11.
[Guest]: Yes, things do change with 9-11.
[Guest]: But, but again, I think from a longer historical perspective, you know, the change doesn't
[Guest]: seem as marked as it seemed to us at that point of time.
[Guest]: Let me say this both with respect to India Pakistan relations, but also Pakistan, Afghanistan,
[Guest]: right.
[Guest]: So from the Pakistan Afghanistan thing, what is interesting is 9-11 once again, reaffirms
[Guest]: a sort of a pattern of cyclical engagement, disengagement between Pakistan and China,
[Guest]: right.
[Guest]: In the mid 1950s, Pakistan and China come together, Pakistan and America come together.
[Guest]: In the 1960s, it's a bit of a turn back.
[Guest]: In the early 70s, again, they sort of together, late 70s and early 80s, they're together again
[Guest]: in Afghanistan.
[Guest]: So you have that sort of cyclical disengagement, reengagement happening.
[Guest]: And that is primarily because of Pakistan's geopolitical location more than anything else.
[Guest]: So in a sense, if Pakistan has an advantage, it's actually geography.
[Guest]: And it sits strides areas, which are quite difficult for anybody else to access and has
[Guest]: a certain vantage point, because of its peculiar geography, which, you know, gives us certain
[Guest]: kinds of advantages.
[Guest]: And that's what you know, colleagues like Nitin Pai say that, you know, it's geopolitical
[Guest]: rent, right.
[Guest]: I mean, in some ways, that's exactly what it is a geographic rent, actually.
[Guest]: I mean, in geopolitics comes fundamentally from your geography, right.
[Guest]: So that is a huge advantage.
[Guest]: In the context of US India relations, of course, you know, it's a, it's a very different kind
[Guest]: of reaction, right?
[Guest]: Because what happens post 9-11 is that certain forms of activity that the Americans might
[Guest]: have sort of put up with through the 90s, in the name of sort of freedom fighters in
[Guest]: Kashmir, etc, then comes to be characterized as terrorism and sort of broadly not acceptable
[Guest]: sort of behavior.
[Guest]: And of course, you also have two other things which happened in that period, right, which
[Guest]: is that you have an American President George W. Bush, who is, again, a very, you know,
[Guest]: someone I feel had the American sort of ideology that we spoke about very, very strongly in
[Guest]: his head.
[Guest]: I mean, that's the way he used to think about the world, right.
[Guest]: So for him, the world was about republics and democracies on the one side and others
[Guest]: on the other side.
[Guest]: So in a sense, that aspect of it allowed him to think of India as this very important kind
[Guest]: of country and so on.
[Guest]: The second thing which happens in the, you know, in the in the year around the sort of
[Guest]: fixation with terrorism and other kinds of security threats is a wider sort of, you know,
[Guest]: demographic change which is happening, which is the exponential growth of the Indian American
[Guest]: community in the United States of America, right.
[Guest]: And their extraordinary success in the United States, right.
[Guest]: I mean, there's a new book edited by Devesh Kapoor and other colleagues called The Other
[Guest]: One Percent, which is to say that, you know, the Indian Americans are actually the top
[Guest]: one percent in of all immigrant communities.
[Guest]: So Indians are living the American dream there.
[Guest]: They are.
[Guest]: I mean, and, you know, they're referred to as a model minority.
[Guest]: Of course, you know, those kind of blanket terms always mask various kinds of differences
[Guest]: and so on.
[Guest]: But the reality is that, you know, the cultural impressions that Americans had of India, you
[Guest]: know, which we've now spoken about at length, in some ways are dramatically changed in that
[Guest]: decade.
[Guest]: So I think, you know, while the activities of 9-11 were happening, there is also this
[Guest]: background churn of migration, democracy, cultural change, which to me seems at least
[Guest]: as important as the sort of surface events of terrorism.
[Amit Varma]: So, I mean, the closeness of India and US, I mean, you can't turn the clock back.
[Amit Varma]: It's there and it's just going to go deeper.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And I think, I mean, it can only turn back if American society itself changes, right.
[Guest]: And in a sense, if we find, you know, sort of backlash against immigrants and such like
[Guest]: things coming back, then we might be able to sort of say that, you know, yes, we're
[Guest]: going to have a slightly more difficult period.
[Guest]: But at this point of time, I'd say that, you know, some of those sort of longer term issues,
[Guest]: which were so persistent, have undergone significant changes.
[Guest]: And it's not clear to me that, you know, the clock is going to be turned back.
[Amit Varma]: And what's also interesting is that while in the 80s, in the phase where they were supporting
[Amit Varma]: India, I suppose they were tolerant of a lot that Pakistan did, especially with regard
[Amit Varma]: to India.
[Amit Varma]: But now they've called bullshit on Pakistan in various ways.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, that dynamic is no longer there.
[Guest]: Yes, but I would be sort of a little cautious about how we call that particular situation.
[Guest]: Because the one thing which again, slightly longer term perspective suggests is that the
[Guest]: United States and Pakistan have had pretty bad times as well as good times, right?
[Guest]: I mean, they've been close, but they've also been sort of, they've been both best of friends
[Guest]: and best of enemies.
[Guest]: So, you know, in that sense, they've always had a...
[Amit Varma]: It's like an abusive marriage.
[Amit Varma]: It's like, I need you, but you keep lying to me.
[Guest]: That is the Pakistani view, right?
[Guest]: Pakistanis believe that Americans just use them and, you know, throw away, you know,
[Guest]: as somebody said, colorfully once that, you know, in that sense, that's a Pakistani certainly
[Amit Varma]: view.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, I traveled through Pakistan in 2006.
[Amit Varma]: And I was chatting with economists there.
[Amit Varma]: And one of them said that all of them refer to Al-Qaeda as Al-Faida, because the Pakistani
[Amit Varma]: state was basically failing in 2001.
[Amit Varma]: When, you know, all that happened.
[Amit Varma]: And suddenly American aid flooded back in and they kind of revived.
[Guest]: So long as Americans are engaged in Afghanistan, and when I say engaged, I don't just mean
[Guest]: military presence, but I find it difficult to understand how the United States is going
[Guest]: to entirely pull out of a place like Afghanistan.
[Guest]: You know, that area overlooks the backyard of China and Russia, in a sense, given their
[Guest]: already existing military infrastructure presence, they might thin down, but I don't see them
[Guest]: as giving up turning their backs on Afghanistan.
[Guest]: You know, there's going to be no Vietnam like moment for Afghanistan, as far as I can see.
[Guest]: So in that context, you know, having some degree of stability in Afghanistan will be
[Guest]: an important concern.
[Guest]: And I think one of the challenges that the Trump administration is going to face very
[Guest]: soon is how are you going to have stability in Afghanistan, when you antagonize both Pakistan
[Guest]: and Iran simultaneously, right?
[Guest]: That seems to me to be a perfect recipe for having asking for trouble in Afghanistan.
[Guest]: So you may well see a degree of modulation of policy towards Pakistan, which again, I
[Guest]: would not be surprised.
[Guest]: I mean, I'm
[Guest]: Yeah, geopolitical.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So in a sense, you know, that that has happened so often now, that it is difficult to see.
[Guest]: And I mean, you know, you would have imagined that if you if you want a sensible policy,
[Guest]: you would say that, listen, the bigger threat is Pakistan sort of support for terrorism,
[Guest]: especially in conjunction with nuclear weapons, you know, that the whole constellation of
[Guest]: things which is so explosive out there, which if not controlled can get out of hand, you
[Guest]: know, so it's better that we sort of, you know, keep Iran on the good side and, you
[Guest]: know, try and put pressure on Pakistan.
[Guest]: But then the Trump administration has chosen to tear up the one agreement they had with
[Amit Varma]: Iran.
[Amit Varma]: And we also now have a new elephant in the room, like how does the rise of China impact
[Amit Varma]: the way the Cold War is over, the Soviets are not a factor, but how does how does the
[Amit Varma]: rise of China impact the way America looks at this region?
[Guest]: Well, I think it's it's it's going to be increasingly very important part, right?
[Guest]: So US China relations, you know, are now I think we are now at a point where the Americans
[Guest]: have more or less, you know, irrespective of the Trump administration, I think, you
[Guest]: know, there's a broader understanding today in the United States that China is going to
[Guest]: be the main competitor for us, right?
[Guest]: Which I don't think was accepted quite as openly until now.
[Guest]: But now even constituencies like businesses, which were always supportive of, you know,
[Guest]: closer relations with China, understand and accept that, you know, Chinese practices are
[Guest]: sort of the thing and so on.
[Guest]: So I think I think, you know, you're now entering into a era where China will be seen as a peer
[Guest]: competitor or at least a potential peer competitor.
[Guest]: So you know, there is going to be a lot of circling of wagons against Chinese.
[Guest]: Now, but at the same time, the China Pakistan relationship has been extremely strong over
[Guest]: the past decade, you know, you've seen Chinese and Pakistanis coming together in very, very
[Guest]: significant ways.
[Guest]: And I think that trend is only going to get accelerated.
[Guest]: But again, I would give credit for the Pakistanis, right?
[Guest]: I mean, throughout the Cold War, they managed to keep the United States and China and even
[Guest]: the Soviet Union on reasonably favorable terms, right?
[Guest]: So for a country, you know, which, you know, has had other kinds of problems of various
[Guest]: kinds, you know, they've managed to keep a reasonably creditable diplomatic act together.
[Guest]: So I'd imagine that, you know, they'd be able to sort of work both sides of this.
[Guest]: But I think as far as US India relations are concerned, definitely the rise of China and
[Guest]: this kind of thing will will make for greater, you know, commonality of interest between
[Guest]: the two sides in terms of managing that particular rise, in terms of ensuring that that rise
[Guest]: is not destabilizing to the rest of the world, and so on.
[Guest]: The larger question, however, I think, which is there before all of us is, to what extent
[Guest]: does the sort of attitude taken by the Trump administration mark a historical sort of rupture
[Guest]: from America's engagement with the subcontinent, at least since the onset of the Second World
[Guest]: War, right?
[Guest]: As we've discussed, I mean, the United States has had problems with countries like India,
[Guest]: you know, on various kinds of dimensions, whether it's in foreign policy, economic issues,
[Guest]: etc.
[Guest]: But broadly speaking, the United States has believed that, you know, supporting countries
[Guest]: like India is a larger geopolitical interest, right?
[Guest]: Whether it was supporting India's five year plans, or, you know, its liberalization, whatever,
[Guest]: even though they were unhappy with the pace of various kinds of things right up to date,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: I mean, in a sense, there has been analysts like Ashley Tellis say, degree of strategic
[Guest]: altruism as far as the United States is concerned.
[Guest]: There has been an assumption, at least under the Bush and Obama administrations, that the
[Guest]: rise of India in some ways is automatically an American good, whether Indians actually
[Guest]: do anything for America or not.
[Guest]: Now, Donald Trump clearly takes a very different view.
[Guest]: He wants people to do things for America because he believes they owe the United States.
[Amit Varma]: He has a zero sum view of the world and everything is transactional.
[Guest]: So yeah, so in a sense, it's and in that sense, I think, if the Trump phenomenon proves to
[Guest]: be durable, which is to say that, you know, it is more than just the passing whimsy of
[Guest]: one particular politician who has managed to capture power by whatever reasons.
[Guest]: That could then mark a very different set of things, right?
[Guest]: Because that then marks a certain kind of disengagement or a reorientation of America's
[Guest]: position in the world, which is very different from everything that the United States did
[Guest]: in the post Second World War period, right?
[Guest]: And it's in that sense that, you know, I think when Americans say that, you know, is the
[Guest]: liberal international order coming to an end and so on.
[Guest]: There's a lot of debate currently about that stuff.
[Guest]: People tend to argue about whether or was it a liberal order, etc.
[Guest]: But I think the bottom line point is this, which is that when the United States came
[Guest]: into the Second World War, it took a certain view of its position in the world, which was
[Guest]: to say that if we want to be the global sort of leader and hegemon, then we need to be
[Guest]: able to take asymmetric costs for that kind of leadership position, both economically,
[Guest]: in security terms, political terms, and so on.
[Guest]: Now with the Trump administration, those assumptions are under question, because here it believes
[Amit Varma]: that everyone is ripping off America.
[Amit Varma]: Is he the first president who's actually thrust aside that sense of manifest destiny?
[Guest]: Not really, you know, there have been previous American presidents who have confronted very
[Guest]: similar kinds of dilemmas.
[Guest]: And I think the person who confronted it in the starkest terms in some ways was Richard
[Guest]: Nixon.
[Guest]: Because you think about it, right?
[Guest]: When Richard Nixon becomes president in 1969, the United States is in this long war in Vietnam,
[Guest]: which is going nowhere.
[Guest]: The American sort of economy is under terrible strain, partly because of its military expenditure
[Guest]: in Vietnam, but also this whole sort of pegging the dollar to the gold, which was the old
[Guest]: Bretton Woods order is kind of coming up, right?
[Guest]: And what is the Nixon administration's response?
[Guest]: Nixon's administration's response is one to unilaterally get out of the Bretton Woods
[Guest]: order in 1971, right?
[Guest]: With zero notice to anyone, just one fine day say, sorry, convertibility of dollar and
[Guest]: gold no longer exists.
[Guest]: We are now in a world of free floating exchange rates, which is as big a shock as you can
[Guest]: give to the global economy as anything could be.
[Guest]: The second thing he says is the so-called Nixon doctrine, where he says that American
[Guest]: allies will now have to start taking sort of contributing more towards their own security.
[Guest]: You cannot expect the United States to do, right?
[Guest]: So it's not very different from what Donald Trump is saying.
[Guest]: But the reality was that people like Nixon, Kissinger, Howard never believed that the
[Guest]: United States had to, you know, basically do transactional deals with everyone around,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Or to expect reciprocity from everyone, right?
[Guest]: See, for a country like India, I think the problem is this, that when you see the United
[Guest]: States dealing in this fashion with allies like Canada, or Germany, or Japan, then as
[Guest]: a country which is, you know, still very decidedly non-allied to the United States, what do you
[Guest]: expect to happen to you, right?
[Guest]: And I think the prognosis in some ways is going to be a bit mixed, right?
[Guest]: You can never be too sure that, you know, you won't get caught in the crosshairs or
[Guest]: some kind of a thing.
[Guest]: And, you know, for instance, this whole obsession with, you know, every trade relationship has
[Guest]: to be balanced.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, that's the most extraordinary way of thinking about it.
[Guest]: Yeah, but but it's there, right?
[Guest]: I mean, he's doing it to everyone.
[Guest]: I mean, again, you know, just now they've given notice to Japan.
[Guest]: And he said in a press conference that India has agreed that they're going to begin talks
[Guest]: and so on.
[Guest]: I don't know what has been agreed.
[Guest]: But, you know, those things are coming.
[Guest]: So it will make for a pretty interesting and challenging period for us to navigate.
[Amit Varma]: To say the least.
[Amit Varma]: So in this episode, I've taken up more than 90 minutes of your time, and we've already
[Amit Varma]: sort of reached the present day, which is the end of history.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm going to ask you to end by sort of asking you a question with two parts, which
[Amit Varma]: is instead of looking back, look forward and tell me that from a vantage point of 2028,
[Amit Varma]: what is the best case scenario and the worst case scenario of American involvement in South
[Amit Varma]: Asia?
[Guest]: Well, what is the best case scenario is that you have a situation in Afghanistan, which
[Guest]: is not much worse than what you have right now, in a sense, winning the war against the
[Guest]: Taliban with the kind of commitment that they want to make.
[Amit Varma]: But you see it as an ongoing thing, not won the war, winning the war.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So in a sense, it will be an ongoing issue of management of the problem, right?
[Guest]: See, my own sense is, you know, Donald Trump was definitely not the first president to
[Guest]: deal with these problems.
[Guest]: He's not going to be the last president, right?
[Guest]: Because many of these issues are issues that stem from the region's own problems.
[Guest]: There is only so much that any American administration can do.
[Guest]: So they can either work with the grain or against the grain.
[Guest]: The best hope is that, you know, you can manage the problems rather than solve them, right?
[Guest]: So in that sense, if you're able to sort of keep some degree of stability in Afghanistan
[Guest]: going, if you can prevent Pakistan from say, you know, going further down the route of
[Guest]: terrorism support for that kind of infrastructure, you know, ensure that political sort of leadership,
[Guest]: leadership in Pakistan slowly gets some degree of, you know, strength within their system
[Guest]: and so on.
[Guest]: And you have a relationship with India, which kind of continues to improve.
[Guest]: And I think the improvement is not just in security terms, but I think also in economic
[Amit Varma]: terms, I think that that's going to be a...
[Amit Varma]: Okay, your best case is incredibly boring.
[Guest]: What's the worst case?
[Guest]: Yeah, what are the worst case?
[Guest]: The worst case is that, you know, you have, you could end up with a series of sort of
[Guest]: conflicts between Afghanistan, Pakistan, or Pakistan and India.
[Guest]: One of which have to be sort of traditional wars of the kinds that happened in the past,
[Guest]: though, you know, nobody can rule out those kinds of things.
[Guest]: But various kinds of challenges for which the United States doesn't have really the
[Guest]: capacity to intervene in the way that it was able to do in the past, right?
[Guest]: I mean, to me, the most important challenge, I mean, forget 2028, but even today would
[Guest]: be that, does the Trump administration really have the understanding, attention span and
[Guest]: interest to be able to engage with the subcontinent if you have, say, a crisis like what happened
[Guest]: in 2001 and 2002, like when there was a serious attack on India, right?
[Guest]: I mean, of that scale or something around the scale of 2008.
[Guest]: I mean, what do we expect Americans to sort of really be able to do in that context, given
[Guest]: how depleted diplomatic resources are in this administration, and so on, right?
[Guest]: So in that sense, I think a lot depends on whether the current trends continue up to
[Guest]: 2028 or not in the United States, right?
[Guest]: I mean, if things take a turn for the better, then you know, you're always going to be this
[Guest]: thing.
[Guest]: But at this point of time, I think, as you said, you know, the best case scenario is
[Guest]: that you sort of more or less continue to chug along the same lines, which is more of
[Guest]: the same.
[Guest]: And the worst case scenario is that you have crises that the United States is not able
[Guest]: to manage in any meaningful way, in looked upon in a historical baseline, right?
[Guest]: I mean, looked upon, say, from the baseline of 1962, when you had the Cuban Missile Crisis
[Guest]: going on, but still, you were able to do some things when you had a problem in the subcontinent.
[Amit Varma]: So the best case scenario is more of the same.
[Amit Varma]: And we are all still here in 2028.
[Amit Varma]: Sreenath, thanks so much for this conversation.
[Amit Varma]: I've learned a lot from you today and hope to chat with you again sometime.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks a lot.
[Amit Varma]: This is good.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, head on over to Amazon and buy a copy of Sreenath
[Amit Varma]: Raghavan's excellent book, The Most Dangerous Place, a history of the United States in South
[Amit Varma]: Asia.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow him on Twitter at Sreenath Raghava 3 at S R I N A T H R A G H A V A 3.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me at Amit Verma, A M I T V A R M A. And you can browse past episodes
[Amit Varma]: of The Seen and The Unseen on seenunseen.in or thinkpragati.com.
[Unknown]: Thank you for listening.
[Unknown]: Have you gotten yourself a gym membership and shown up only a few times?
[Unknown]: Are long working hours cutting your fitness goals short?
[Unknown]: How about you change things a little?
[Unknown]: Even a small effort can make a big difference.
[Unknown]: And I'll tell you how and what exactly.
[Unknown]: Hi guys, I'm Coach Urmi and on the Kinetic Living podcast, you can look forward to some
[Unknown]: interesting stories of people who have changed the way they look at fitness after their kinetic
[Unknown]: journeys.
[Unknown]: Episodes out every Wednesday on the IBM app, website and anywhere you get your podcasts
[Unknown]: from.
[Unknown]: How aware do you think you are of your laws and rights?
[Unknown]: Do you look up to laws when you're caught up in situations?
[Unknown]: Do you know what your rights are when you're stuck somewhere bad?
[Unknown]: Well, here's a show that can help you move an inch closer to being aware of what your
[Unknown]: rights are.
[Unknown]: Tune in to Know Your Kanun with me Amar Rana.
[Unknown]: This is a podcast meant to answer all your law related queries.
[Unknown]: Catch Know Your Kanun every week on the IBM website or the app or anywhere you get your
[Unknown]: podcasts from.